<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>The Byzantine Empire</title>
      <author><name reg="Oman, Charles William Chadwick">Charles William Chadwick Oman</name></author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="3">Edition 3</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>October 14, 2011</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">37756</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="la"></language>
      <language id="fr"></language>
      <language id="el"></language>
      <language id="it"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2011-10-14">October 14, 2011</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by Adrian Mastronardi, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
            (This file was produced from images generously made
            available by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries.)
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">The Byzantine Empire</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">By</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">Charles William Chadwick Oman, M.A., F.S.A.</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Fellow of All Souls College, Oxford</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Author of</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center"><q>Warwick the Kingmaker,</q> <q>The Art of War in the Middle Ages,</q> Etc.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Third Edition</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">T. Fisher Unwin, Ltd.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Adelphi Terrace, London</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">1902</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>

<pb n='iv'/><anchor id='Pgiv'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/frontispiece.png' rend='width: 50%'>
    <head>Interior of St. Sophia</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>
</div>

<pb n='vii'/><anchor id='Pgvii'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Preface.</head>

<p>
Fifty years ago the word <q>Byzantine</q> was used
as a synonym for all that was corrupt and decadent,
and the tale of the East-Roman Empire was dismissed
by modern historians as depressing and
monotonous. The great Gibbon had branded the
successors of Justinian and Heraclius as a series of
vicious weaklings, and for several generations no one
dared to contradict him.
</p>

<p>
Two books have served to undeceive the English
reader, the monumental work of Finlay, published in
1856, and the more modern volumes of Mr. Bury,
which appeared in 1889. Since they have written,
the Byzantines no longer need an apologist, and the
great work of the East-Roman Empire in holding
back the Saracen, and in keeping alive throughout
the Dark Ages the lamp of learning, is beginning to
be realized.
</p>

<p>
The writer of this book has endeavoured to tell
the story of Byzantium in the spirit of Finlay and
Bury, not in that of Gibbon. He wishes to acknowledge
his debts both to the veteran of the war of
<pb n='viii'/><anchor id='Pgviii'/>
Greek Independence, and to the young Dublin professor.
Without their aid his task would have been
very heavy&mdash;with it the difficulty was removed.
</p>

<p>
The author does not claim to have grappled with
all the chroniclers of the Eastern realm, but thinks
that some acquaintance with Ammianus, Procopius,
Maurice's <q>Strategikon,</q> Leo the Deacon, Leo the
Wise, Constantine Porphyrogenitus, Anna Comnena
and Nicetas, may justify his having undertaken the
task he has essayed.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Oxford</hi>,
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>February</hi>, 1892.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='xx'/><anchor id='Pgxx'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/front-map.png' rend='width: 80%'>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>
</div>

<pb n='001'/><anchor id='Pg001'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>I. Byzantium.</head>

<p>
Two thousand five hundred and fifty-eight years
ago a little fleet of galleys toiled painfully against the
current up the long strait of the Hellespont, rowed
across the broad Propontis, and came to anchor in
the smooth waters of the first inlet which cuts into the
European shore of the Bosphorus. There a long
crescent-shaped creek, which after-ages were to know
as the Golden Horn, strikes inland for seven miles,
forming a quiet backwater from the rapid stream
which runs outside. On the headland, enclosed
between this inlet and the open sea, a few hundred
colonists disembarked, and hastily secured themselves
from the wild tribes of the inland, by running some
rough sort of a stockade across the ground from beach
to beach. Thus was founded the city of Byzantium.
</p>

<p>
The settlers were Greeks of the Dorian race,
natives of the thriving seaport-state of Megara, one of
<pb n='002'/><anchor id='Pg002'/>
the most enterprising of all the cities of Hellas in the
time of colonial and commercial expansion which was
then at its height. Wherever a Greek prow had cut
its way into unknown waters, there Megarian seamen
were soon found following in its wake. One band of
these venturesome traders pushed far to the West to
plant colonies in Sicily, but the larger share of the
attention of Megara was turned towards the sunrising,
towards the mist-enshrouded entrance of the Black
Sea and the fabulous lands that lay beyond. There,
as legends told, was to be found the realm of the
Golden Fleece, the Eldorado of the ancient world,
where kings of untold wealth reigned over the tribes
of Colchis: there dwelt, by the banks of the river
Thermodon, the Amazons, the warlike women who
had once vexed far-off Greece by their inroads: there,
too, was to be found, if one could but struggle far
enough up its northern shore, the land of the Hyperboreans,
the blessed folk who dwell behind the North
Wind and know nothing of storm and winter. To
seek these fabled wonders the Greeks sailed ever
North and East till they had come to the extreme
limits of the sea. The riches of the Golden Fleece
they did not find, nor the country of the Hyperboreans,
nor the tribes of the Amazons; but they did
discover many lands well worth the knowing, and
grew rich on the profits which they drew from the
metals of Colchis and the forests of Paphlagonia, from
the rich corn lands by the banks of the Dnieper and
Bug, and the fisheries of the Bosphorus and the
Maeotic Lake. Presently the whole coastland of the
sea, which the Greeks, on their first coming, called
<pb n='003'/><anchor id='Pg003'/>
Axeinos&mdash;<q>the Inhospitable</q>&mdash;became fringed with
trading settlements, and its name was changed
to Euxeinos&mdash;<q>the Hospitable</q>&mdash;in recognition of
its friendly ports. It was in a similar spirit that, two
thousand years later, the seamen who led the next
great impulse of exploration that rose in Europe,
turned the name of the <q>Cape of Storms</q> into that
of the <q>Cape of Good Hope.</q>
</p>

<p>
The Megarians, almost more than any other Greeks,
devoted their attention to the Euxine, and the
foundation of Byzantium was but one of their many
achievements. Already, seventeen years before
Byzantium came into being, another band of
Megarian colonists had established themselves at
Chalcedon, on the opposite Asiatic shore of the
Bosphorus. The settlers who were destined to found
the greater city applied to the oracle of Delphi to
give them advice as to the site of their new home, and
Apollo, we are told, bade them <q>build their town
over against the city of the blind.</q> They therefore
pitched upon the headland by the Golden Horn,
reasoning that the Chalcedonians were truly blind to
have neglected the more eligible site on the Thracian
shore, in order to found a colony on the far less inviting
Bithynian side of the strait.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/fig-01.png' rend='width: 80%'>
    <head>Early Coin Of Byzantium.</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/fig-02.png' rend='width: 80%'>
    <head>Late Coin Of Byzantium Showing Crescent And Star.</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
From the first its situation marked out Byzantium
as destined for a great future. Alike from the military
and from the commercial point of view no city
could have been better placed. Looking out from the
easternmost headland of Thrace, with all Europe
behind it and all Asia before, it was equally well
suited to be the frontier fortress to defend the border
<pb n='004'/><anchor id='Pg004'/>
of the one, or the basis of operations for an invasion
from the other. As fortresses went in those early days
it was almost impregnable&mdash;two sides protected by
the water, the third by a strong wall not commanded
by any neighbouring heights. In all its early history
Byzantium never fell by storm: famine or treachery
accounted for the few occasions on which it fell into
the hands of an enemy. In its commercial aspect the
place was even more favourably situated. It completely
commanded the whole Black Sea trade: every
vessel that went forth from Greece or Ionia to traffic
with Scythia or Colchis, the lands by the Danube
mouth or the shores of the Maeotic Lake, had to pass
close under its walls, so that the prosperity of a hundred
Hellenic towns on the Euxine was always at the
mercy of the masters of Byzantium. The Greek loved
short stages and frequent stoppages, and as a half-way
house alone Byzantium would have been prosperous:
but it had also a flourishing local trade of its own
with the tribes of the neighbouring Thracian inland,
<pb n='005'/><anchor id='Pg005'/>
and drew much profit from its fisheries: so much so
that the city badge&mdash;its coat of arms as we should
call it&mdash;comprised a tunny-fish as well as the famous
ox whose form alluded to the legend of the naming
of the Bosphorus.<note place='foot'>See coin on opposite page. The Bosphorus was supposed to
have drawn its name from being the place where Io, when transformed
into a cow, forded the strait from Europe into Asia Βοῦς-πορὸς.</note>
</p>

<p>
As an independent state Byzantium had a long and
eventful history. For thirty years it was in the hands
of the kings of Persia, but with that short exception
it maintained its freedom during the first three hundred
years that followed its foundation. Many stirring
scenes took place beneath its walls: it was close to
them that the great Darius threw across the
Bosphorus his bridge of boats, which served as a
model for the more famous structure on which his
son Xerxes crossed the Hellespont. Fifteen years
later, when Byzantium in common with all its neighbours
made an ineffectual attempt to throw off the
Persian yoke, in the rising called the <q>Ionic Revolt,</q>
it was held for a time by the arch-rebel Histiaeus,
who&mdash;as much to enrich himself as to pay his seamen&mdash;invented
strait dues. He forced every ship passing
up or down the Bosphorus to pay a heavy toll, and
won no small unpopularity thereby for the cause of
freedom which he professed to champion. Ere long
Byzantium fell back again into the hands of Persia,
but she was finally freed from the Oriental yoke
seventeen years later, when the victorious Greeks,
fresh from the triumph of Salamis and Mycale, sailed
up to her walls and after a long leaguer starved out
<pb n='006'/><anchor id='Pg006'/>
the obstinate garrison [<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 479]. The fleet wintered
there, and it was at Byzantium that the first foundations
of the naval empire of Athens were laid, when
all the Greek states of Asia placed their ships at
the disposal of the Athenian admirals Cimon and
Aristeides.
</p>

<p>
During the fifth century Byzantium twice declared
war on Athens, now the mistress of the seas, and on
each occasion fell into the hands of the enemy&mdash;once
by voluntary surrender in 439 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>, once by treachery
from within, in 408 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> But the Athenians, except in
one or two disgraceful cases, did not deal hardly with
their conquered enemies, and the Byzantines escaped
anything harder than the payment of a heavy war
indemnity. In a few years their commercial gains
repaired all the losses of war, and the state was itself
again.
</p>

<p>
We know comparatively little about the internal
history of these early centuries of the life of Byzantium.
Some odd fragments of information survive here and
there: we know, for example, that they used iron
instead of copper for small money, a peculiarity
shared by no other ancient state save Sparta. Their
alphabet rejoiced in an abnormally shaped Β, which
puzzled all other Greeks, for it resembled a Π with an
extra limb.<note place='foot'>See coin on page <ref target='Pg003'>4</ref>.</note> The chief gods of the city were those
that we might have expected&mdash;Poseidon the ruler of
the sea, whose blessing gave Byzantium its chief
wealth; and Demeter, the goddess who presided over
the Thracian and Scythian corn lands which formed
its second source of prosperity.
</p>

<pb n='007'/><anchor id='Pg007'/>

<p>
The Byzantines were, if ancient chroniclers tell us
the truth, a luxurious as well as a busy race: they
spent too much time in their numerous inns, where
the excellent wines of Maronea and other neighbouring
places offered great temptations. They were
gluttons too as well as tipplers: on one occasion, we
are assured, the whole civic militia struck work in the
height of a siege, till their commander consented to
allow restaurants to be erected at convenient distances
round the ramparts. One comic writer informs us
that the Byzantines were eating young tunny-fish&mdash;their
favourite dish&mdash;so constantly, that their whole
bodies had become well-nigh gelatinous, and it was
thought they might melt if exposed to too great heat!
Probably these tales are the scandals of neighbours
who envied Byzantine prosperity, for it is at any rate
certain that the city showed all through its history
great energy and love of independence, and never
shrank from war as we should have expected a nation
of epicures to do.
</p>

<p>
It was not till the rise of Philip of Macedon and
his greater son Alexander that Byzantium fell for the
fifth time into the hands of an enemy. The elder
king was repulsed from the city's walls after a long
siege, culminating in an attempt at an escalade by night,
which was frustrated owing to the sudden appearance
of a light in heaven, which revealed the advancing
enemy and was taken by the Byzantines as a token
of special divine aid [<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 339]. In commemoration
of it they assumed as one of their civic badges the
blazing crescent and star, which has descended to our
own days and is still used as an emblem by the present
<pb n='008'/><anchor id='Pg008'/>
owners of the city&mdash;the Ottoman Sultans. But after
repulsing Philip the Byzantines had to submit some
years later to Alexander. They formed under him
part of the enormous Macedonian empire, and passed
on his decease through the hands of his successors&mdash;Demetrius
Poliorcetes, and Lysimachus. After the
death of the latter in battle, however, they recovered
a precarious freedom, and were again an independent
community for a hundred years, till the power of
Rome invaded the regions of Thrace and the Hellespont.
</p>

<p>
Byzantium was one of the cities which took the
wise course of making an early alliance with the
Romans, and obtained good and easy terms in consequence.
During the wars of Rome with Macedon
and Antiochus the Great it proved such a faithful
assistant that the Senate gave it the status of a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>civitas
libera et foederata</foreign>, <q>a free and confederate city,</q> and
it was not taken under direct Roman government, but
allowed complete liberty in everything save the control
of its foreign relations and the payment of a
tribute to Rome. It was not till the Roman Republic
had long passed away, that the Emperor Vespasian
stripped it of these privileges, and threw it into the
province of Thrace, to exist for the future as an
ordinary provincial town [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 73].
</p>

<p>
Though deprived of a liberty which had for long
years been almost nominal, Byzantium could not be
deprived of its unrivalled position for commerce. It
continued to flourish under the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Pax Romana</foreign>, the
long-continued peace which all the inner countries of
the empire enjoyed during the first two centuries of
<pb n='009'/><anchor id='Pg009'/>
the imperial <foreign rend='italic'>régime</foreign>, and is mentioned again and again
as one of the most important cities of the middle
regions of the Roman world.
</p>

<p>
But an evil time for Byzantium, as for all the other
parts of the civilized world, began when the golden
age of the Antonines ceased, and the epoch of the military
emperors followed. In 192 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>, Commodus, the
unworthy son of the great and good Marcus Aurelius,
was murdered, and ere long three military usurpers
were wrangling for his blood-stained diadem. Most
unhappily for itself Byzantium lay on the line of
division between the eastern provinces, where Pescennius
Niger had been proclaimed, and the Illyrian
provinces, where Severus had assumed the imperial
style. The city was seized by the army of Syria, and
strengthened in haste. Presently Severus appeared
from the west, after he had made himself master of
Rome and Italy, and fell upon the forces of his rival
Pescennius. Victory followed the arms of the Illyrian
legions, the east was subdued, and the Syrian
emperor put to death. But when all his other
adherents had yielded, the garrison of Byzantium
refused to submit. For more than two years they
maintained the impregnable city against the lieutenants
of Severus, and it was not till <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 196 that
they were forced to yield. The emperor appeared in
person to punish the long-protracted resistance of the
town; not only the garrison, but the civil magistrates
of Byzantium were slain before his eyes. The massive
walls <q>so firmly built with great square stones clamped
together with bolts of iron, that the whole seemed but
one block,</q> were laboriously cast down. The property
<pb n='010'/><anchor id='Pg010'/>
of the citizens was confiscated, and the town itself
deprived of all municipal privileges and handed over
to be governed like a dependent village by its neighbours
of Perinthus.
</p>

<p>
Caracalla, the son of Severus, gave back to the
Byzantines the right to govern themselves, but the
town had received a hard blow, and would have
required a long spell of peace to recover its prosperity.
Peace however it was not destined to see. All through
the middle years of the third century it was vexed by
the incursions of the Goths, who harried mercilessly
the countries on the Black Sea whose commerce sustained
its trade. Under Gallienus in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 263 it was
again seized by an usurping emperor, and shared the
fate of his adherents. The soldiers of Gallienus
sacked Byzantium from cellar to garret, and made
such a slaughter of its inhabitants that it is said that
the old Megarian race who had so long possessed it
were absolutely exterminated. But the irresistible
attraction of the site was too great to allow its ruins
to remain desolate. Within ten years after its sack
by the army of Gallienus, we find Byzantium again
a populous town, and its inhabitants are specially
praised by the historian Trebellius Pollio for the
courage with which they repelled a Gothic raid in the
reign of Claudius II.
</p>

<p>
The strong Illyrian emperors, who staved off from
the Roman Empire the ruin which appeared about to
overwhelm it in the third quarter of the third century,
gave Byzantium time and peace to recover its ancient
prosperity. It profited especially from the constant
neighbourhood of the imperial court, after Diocletian
<pb n='011'/><anchor id='Pg011'/>
fixed his residence at Nicomedia, only sixty miles
away, on the Bithynian side of the Propontis. But
the military importance of Byzantium was always
interfering with its commercial greatness. After the
abdication of Diocletian the empire was for twenty
years vexed by constant partitions of territory between
the colleagues whom he left behind him. Byzantium
after a while found itself the border fortress of Licinius,
the emperor who ruled in the Balkan Peninsula, while
Maximinus Daza was governing the Asiatic provinces.
While Licinius was absent in Italy, Maximinus
treacherously attacked his rival's dominions without
declaration of war, and took Byzantium by surprise. But
the Illyrian emperor returned in haste, defeated his
grasping neighbour not far from the walls of the city,
and recovered his great frontier fortress after it had
been only a few months out of his hands [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 314].
The town must have suffered severely by changing
masters twice in the same year; it does not, however,
seem to have been sacked or burnt, as was so often
the case with a captured city in those dismal days.
But Licinius when he had recovered the place set to
work to render it impregnable. Though it was not
his capital he made it the chief fortress of his realm,
which, since the defeat of Maximinus, embraced the
whole eastern half of the Roman world.
</p>

<p>
It was accordingly at Byzantium that Licinius
made his last desperate stand, when in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 323 he
found himself engaged in an unsuccessful war with
his brother-in-law Constantine, the Emperor of the
West. For many months the war stood still beneath
the walls of the city; but Constantine persevered in
<pb n='012'/><anchor id='Pg012'/>
the siege, raising great mounds which overlooked the
walls, and sweeping away the defenders by a constant
stream of missiles, launched from dozens of military
engines which he had erected on these artificial
heights. At last the city surrendered, and the cause
of Licinius was lost. Constantine, the last of his
rivals subdued, became the sole emperor of the
Roman world, and stood a victor on the ramparts
which were ever afterwards to bear his name.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='013'/><anchor id='Pg013'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>II. The Foundation Of Constantinople. (<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 328-330.)</head>

<p>
When the fall of Byzantium had wrecked the
fortunes of Licinius, the Roman world was again
united beneath the sceptre of a single master. For
thirty-seven years, ever since Diocletian parcelled
out the provinces with his colleagues, unity had been
unknown, and emperors, whose number had sometimes
risen to six and sometimes sunk to two, had
administered their realms on different principles and
with varying success.
</p>

<p>
Constantine, whose victory over his rivals had been
secured by his talents as an administrator and a
diplomatist no less than by his military skill, was one
of those men whose hard practical ability has stamped
upon the history of the world a much deeper impress
than has been left by many conquerors and legislators
of infinitely greater genius. He was a man of that
self-contained, self-reliant, unsympathetic type of mind
<pb n='014'/><anchor id='Pg014'/>
which we recognize in his great predecessor Augustus,
or in Frederic the Great of Prussia.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/fig-03.png' rend='width: 60%'>
    <head>Constantine the Great</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Though the strain of old Roman blood in his veins
must have been but small, Constantine was in many
ways a typical Roman; the hard, cold, steady, unwearying
energy, which in earlier centuries had won
the empire of the world, was once more incarnate in
him. But if Roman in character, he was anything
but Roman in his sympathies. Born by the Danube,
<pb n='015'/><anchor id='Pg015'/>
reared in the courts and camps of Asia and Gaul, he
was absolutely free from any of that superstitious
reverence for the ancient glories of the city on the
Tiber which had inspired so many of his predecessors.
Italy was to him but a secondary province amongst
his wide realms. When he distributed his dominions
among his heirs, it was Gaul that he gave as the
noblest share to his eldest and best-loved son: Italy
was to him a younger child's portion. There had
been emperors before him who had neglected Rome:
the barbarian Maximinus I. had dwelt by the Rhine
and the Danube; the politic Diocletian had chosen
Nicomedia as his favourite residence. But no one
had yet dreamed of raising up a rival to the mistress
of the world, and of turning Rome into a provincial
town. If preceding emperors had dwelt far afield,
it was to meet the exigencies of war on the frontiers
or the government of distant provinces. It was
reserved for Constantine to erect over against Rome
a rival metropolis for the civilized world, an imperial
city which was to be neither a mere camp nor a mere
court, but the administrative and commercial centre
of the Roman world.
</p>

<p>
For more than a hundred years Rome had been a
most inconvenient residence for the emperors. The
main problem which had been before them was the
repelling of incessant barbarian inroads on the Balkan
Peninsula; the troubles on the Rhine and the Euphrates,
though real enough, had been but minor evils.
Rome, placed half way down the long projection of
Italy, handicapped by its bad harbours and separated
from the rest of the empire by the passes of the Alps,
<pb n='016'/><anchor id='Pg016'/>
was too far away from the points where the emperor
was most wanted&mdash;the banks of the Danube and the
walls of Sirmium and Singidunum. For the ever-recurring
wars with Persia it was even more inconvenient;
but these were less pressing dangers; no
Persian army had yet penetrated beyond Antioch&mdash;only
200 miles from the frontier&mdash;while in the Balkan
Peninsula the Goths had broken so far into the heart
of the empire as to sack Athens and Thessalonica.
</p>

<p>
Constantine, with all the Roman world at his feet,
and all its responsibilities weighing on his mind, was
far too able a man to overlook the great need of the
day&mdash;a more conveniently placed administrative and
military centre for his empire. He required a place
that should be easily accessible by land and sea&mdash;which
Rome had never been in spite of its wonderful
roads&mdash;that should overlook the Danube lands, without
being too far away from the East; that should be
so strongly situated that it might prove an impregnable
arsenal and citadel against barbarian attacks
from the north; that should at the same time be far
enough away from the turmoil of the actual frontier
to afford a safe and splendid residence for the imperial
court. The names of several towns are given by
historians as having suggested themselves to Constantine.
First was his own birth-place&mdash;Naissus
(Nisch) on the Morava, in the heart of the Balkan
Peninsula; but Naissus had little to recommend it:
it was too close to the frontier and too far from the
sea. Sardica&mdash;the modern Sofia in Bulgaria&mdash;was
liable to the same objections, and had not the sole
advantage of Naissus, that of being connected in
<pb n='017'/><anchor id='Pg017'/>
sentiment with the emperor's early days. Nicomedia
on its long gulf at the east end of the Propontis was
a more eligible situation in every way, and had
already served as an imperial residence. But all
that could be urged in favour of Nicomedia applied
with double force to Byzantium, and, in addition,
Constantine had no wish to choose a city in which
his own memory would be eclipsed by that of his
predecessor Diocletian, and whose name was associated
by the Christians, the class of his subjects whom
he had most favoured of late, with the persecutions of
Diocletian and Galerius. For Ilium, the last place
on which Constantine had cast his mind, nothing
could be alleged except its ancient legendary glories,
and the fact that the mythologists of Rome had
always fabled that their city drew its origin from the
exiled Trojans of Æneas. Though close to the sea
it had no good harbour, and it was just too far from
the mouth of the Hellespont to command effectually
the exit of the Euxine.
</p>

<p>
Byzantium, on the other hand, was thoroughly well
known to Constantine. For months his camp
had been pitched beneath its walls; he must have
known accurately every inch of its environs, and none
of its military advantages can have missed his eye.
Nothing, then, could have been more natural than his
selection of the old Megarian city for his new capital.
Yet the Roman world was startled at the first news
of his choice; Byzantium had been so long known
merely as a great port of call for the Euxine trade, and
as a first-class provincial fortress, that it was hard to
conceive of it as a destined seat of empire.
</p>

<pb n='018'/><anchor id='Pg018'/>

<p>
When once Constantine had determined to make
Byzantium his capital, in preference to any other
place in the Balkan lands, his measures were taken
with his usual energy and thoroughness. The limits
of the new city were at once marked out by solemn
processions in the old Roman style. In later ages a
picturesque legend was told to account for the magnificent
scale on which it was planned. The emperor,
we read, marched out on foot, followed by all his
court, and traced with his spear the line where the
new fortifications were to be drawn. As he paced
on further and further westward along the shore of
the Golden Horn, till he was more than two miles
away from his starting-point, the gate of old Byzantium,
his attendants grew more and more surprised at
the vastness of his scheme. At last they ventured to
observe that he had already exceeded the most ample
limits that an imperial city could require. But Constantine
turned to rebuke them: <q>I shall go on,</q> he
said, <q>until He, the invisible guide who marches
before me, thinks fit to stop.</q> Guided by his mysterious
presentiment of greatness, the emperor advanced
till he was three miles from the eastern angle of
Byzantium, and only turned his steps when he had
included in his boundary line all the seven hills which
are embraced in the peninsula between the Propontis
and the Golden Horn.
</p>

<p>
The rising ground just outside the walls of the old
city, where Constantine's tent had been pitched during
the siege of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 323, was selected out as the market-place
of the new foundation. There he erected the
<foreign rend='italic'>Milion</foreign>, or <q>golden milestone,</q> from which all the
<pb n='019'/><anchor id='Pg019'/>
distances of the eastern world were in future to be
measured. This <q>central point of the world</q> was
not a mere single stone, but a small building like a
temple, its roof supported by seven pillars; within
was placed the statue of the emperor, together with
that of his venerated mother, the Christian Empress
Helena.
</p>

<p>
The south-eastern part of the old town of Byzantium
was chosen by Constantine for the site of his
imperial palace. The spot was cleared of all private
dwellings for a space of 150 acres, to give space
not only for a magnificent residence for his whole
court, but for spacious gardens and pleasure-grounds.
A wall, commencing at the Lighthouse, where the
Bosphorus joins the Propontis, turned inland and
swept along parallel to the shore for about a mile,
in order to shut off the imperial precinct from the
city.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/fig-04.png' rend='width: 80%'>
    <head>The Heart of Constantinople</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
North-west of the palace lay the central open space
in which the life of Constantinople was to find its centre.
This was the <q>Augustaeum,</q> a splendid oblong forum,
about a thousand feet long by three hundred broad.
It was paved with marble and surrounded on all sides
by stately public buildings. To its east, as we have
already said, lay the imperial palace, but between the
palace and the open space were three detached edifices
connected by a colonnade. Of these, the most
easterly was the Great Baths, known, from their
builder, as the <q>Baths of Zeuxippus.</q> They were
built on the same magnificent scale which the earlier
emperors had used in Old Rome, though they could
not, perhaps, vie in size with the enormous Baths
<pb n='021'/><anchor id='Pg021'/>
of Caracalla. Constantine utilized and enlarged the
old public bath of Byzantium, which had been rebuilt
after the taking of the city by Severus. He
adorned the frontage and courts of the edifice with
statues taken from every prominent town of Greece
and Asia, the old Hellenic masterpieces which had
escaped the rapacious hands of twelve generations
of plundering proconsuls and Cæsars. There were
to be seen the Athene of Lyndus, the Amphithrite
of Rhodes, the Pan which had been consecrated by
the Greeks after the defeat of Xerxes, and the Zeus
of Dodona.
</p>

<p>
Adjoining the Baths, to the north, lay the second
great building, on the east side of the Augustaeum&mdash;the
Senate House. Constantine had determined to
endow his new city with a senate modelled on that
of Old Rome, and had indeed persuaded many old
senatorial families to migrate eastward by judicious
gifts of pensions and houses. We know that the
assembly was worthily housed, but no details survive
about Constantine's building, on account of its having
been twice destroyed within the century. But, like
the Baths of Zeuxippus, it was adorned with ancient
statuary, among which the Nine Muses of Helicon
are specially cited by the historian who describes the
burning of the place in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 404.
</p>

<p>
Linked to the Senate House by a colonnade, lay on
the north the Palace of the Patriarch, as the Bishop of
Byzantium was ere long to be called, when raised to
the same status as his brethren of Antioch and
Alexandria. A fine building in itself, with a spacious
hall of audience and a garden, the patriarchal dwelling
<pb n='022'/><anchor id='Pg022'/>
was yet completely overshadowed by the imperial
palace which rose behind it. And so it was with
the patriarch himself: he lived too near his royal
master to be able to gain any independent authority.
Physically and morally alike he was too much overlooked
by his august neighbour, and never found the
least opportunity of setting up an independent spiritual
authority over against the civil government, or of
founding an <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>imperium in imperio</foreign> like the Bishop of
Rome.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/fig-05.png' rend='width: 80%'>
    <head>The Atmeidan Hippodrome And St. Sophia.</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
All along the western side of the Augustaeum,
facing the three buildings which we have already
described, lay an edifice which played a very prominent
part in the public life of Constantinople.
This was the great Hippodrome, a splendid circus
640 cubits long and 160 broad, in which were renewed
the games that Old Rome had known so well.
The whole system the chariot-races between the
teams that represented the <q>factions</q> of the Circus
was reproduced at Byzantium with an energy that
even surpassed the devotion of the Romans to horse
racing. From the first foundation of the city the
rivalry of the <q>Blues</q> and the <q>Greens</q> was one
of the most striking features of the life of the place.
It was carried far beyond the circus, and spread into
all branches of life. We often hear of the <q>Green</q>
faction identifying itself with Arianism, or of the
<q>Blue</q> supporting a pretender to the throne. Not
merely men of sporting interests, but persons of all
ranks and professions, chose their colour and backed
their faction. The system was a positive danger to
the public peace, and constantly led to riots, culminating
<pb n='024'/><anchor id='Pg024'/>
in the great sedition of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 523, which we
shall presently have to describe at length. In the
Hippodrome the <q>Greens</q> always entered by the
north-eastern gate, and sat on the east side; the
<q>Blues</q> approached by the north-western gate and
stretched along the western side. The emperor's
box, called the Kathisma, occupied the whole of the
short northern side, and contained many hundreds of
seats for the imperial retinue. The great central
throne of the Kathisma was the place in which the
monarch showed himself most frequently to his subjects,
and around it many strange scenes were enacted.
It was on this throne that the rebel Hypatius was
crowned emperor by the mob, with his own wife's
necklace for an impromptu diadem. Here also, two
centuries later, the Emperor Justinian II. sat in state
after his reconquest of Constantinople, with his rivals,
Leontius and Apsimarus, bound beneath his footstool,
while the populace chanted, in allusion to the
names of the vanquished princes, the verse, <q>Thou
shalt trample on the Lion and the Asp.</q>
</p>

<p>
Down the centre of the Hippodrome ran the
<q>spina,</q> or division wall, which every circus showed;
it was ornamented with three most curious monuments,
whose strange juxtaposition seemed almost
to typify the heterogeneous materials from which the
new city was built up. The first and oldest was an
obelisk brought from Egypt, and covered with the
usual hieroglyphic inscriptions; the second was the
most notable, though one of the least beautiful, of
the antiquities of Constantinople: it was the three-headed
brazen serpent which Pausanias and the
<pb n='025'/><anchor id='Pg025'/>
victorious Greeks had dedicated at Delphi in 479
<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>, after they had destroyed the Persian army at
Platæa. The golden tripod, which was supported
by the heads of the serpents, had long been wanting:
the sacrilegious Phocians had stolen it six centuries
before; but the dedicatory inscriptions engraved on
the coils of the pedestal survived then and survive
now to delight the archæologist. The third monument
on the <q>spina</q> was a square bronze column of
more modern work, contrasting strangely with the
venerable antiquity of its neighbours. By some
freak of chance all three monuments have remained
till our own day: the vast walls of the Hippodrome
have crumbled away, but its central decorations still
stand erect in the midst of an open space which the
Turks call the Atmeidan, or place of horses, in dim
memory of its ancient use.
</p>

<p>
Along the outer eastern wall of the Hippodrome
on the western edge of the Augustaeum, stood a
range of small chapels and statues, the most important
landmark among them being the <foreign rend='italic'>Milion</foreign>
or central milestone of the empire, which we have
already described. The statues, few at first, were
increased by later emperors, till they extended along
the whole length of the forum. Constantine's own
contribution to the collection was a tall porphyry
column surmounted by a bronze image which had
once been the tutelary Apollo of the city of Hierapolis,
but was turned into a representation of the
emperor by the easy method of knocking off its
head and substituting the imperial features. It was
exactly the reverse of a change which can be seen at
<pb n='027'/><anchor id='Pg027'/>
Rome, where the popes have removed the head of
the Emperor Aurelius, and turned him into St. Peter,
on the column in the Corso.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/fig-06.png' rend='width: 60%'>
    <head>Building A Palace (from a Byzantine MS.)</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
North of the Hippodrome stood the great church
which Constantine erected for his Christian subjects,
and dedicated to the Divine Wisdom (<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Hagia Sophia</foreign>).
It was not the famous domed edifice which now
bears that name, but an earlier and humbler building,
probably of the Basilica-shape then usual. Burnt
down once in the fifth and once in the sixth centuries,
it has left no trace of its original character. From
the west door of St. Sophia a wooden gallery,
supported on arches, crossed the square, and finally
ended at the <q>Royal Gate</q> of the palace. By this
the emperor would betake himself to divine service
without having to cross the street of the Chalcoprateia
(brass market), which lay opposite to St. Sophia.
The general effect of the gallery must have been
somewhat like that of the curious passage perched
aloft on arches which connects the Pitti and Uffizi
palaces at Florence.
</p>

<p>
The edifices which we have described formed the
heart of Constantinople. Between the Palace, the
Hippodrome, and the Cathedral most of the important
events in the history of the city took place. But to
north and west the city extended for miles, and everywhere
there were buildings of note, though no other
cluster could vie with that round the Augustaeum.
The Church of the Holy Apostles, which Constantine
destined as the burying-place of his family, was
the second among the ecclesiastical edifices of the
town. Of the outlying civil buildings, the public
<pb n='028'/><anchor id='Pg028'/>
granaries along the quays, the Golden Gate, by which
the great road from the west entered the walls, and
the palace of the praetorian praefect, who acted as
governor of the city, must all have been well worthy
of notice. A statue of Constantine on horseback,
which stood by the last-named edifice, was one of the
chief shows of Constantinople down to the end of the
Middle Ages, and some curious legends gathered
around it.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/fig-07.png' rend='width: 60%'>
    <head>Fifteenth-Century Drawing Of The Equestrian
Statue Of Constantine.</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
It was in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 328 or 329&mdash;the exact date is not
easily to be fixed&mdash;that Constantine had definitely
chosen Byzantium for his capital, and drawn out the
plan for its development. As early as May 11, 330,
the buildings were so far advanced that he was able
to hold the festival which celebrated its consecration.
<pb n='029'/><anchor id='Pg029'/>
Christian bishops blessed the partially completed
palace, and held the first service in St. Sophia; for
Constantine, though still unbaptized himself, had
determined that the new city should be Christian
from the first. Of paganism there was no trace in
it, save a few of the old temples of the Byzantines,
spared when the older streets were levelled to clear
the ground for the palace and adjoining buildings.
The statues of the gods which adorned the Baths and
Senate House stood there as works of art, not as
objects of worship.
</p>

<p>
To fill the vast limits of his city, Constantine
invited many senators of Old Rome and many rich
provincial proprietors of Greece and Asia to take up
their abode in it, granting them places in his new
senate and sites for the dwellings they would require.
The countless officers and functionaries of the imperial
court, with their subordinates and slaves, must
have composed a very considerable element in the
new population. The artizans and handicraftsmen
were enticed in thousands by the offer of special
privileges. Merchants and seamen had always
abounded at Byzantium, and now flocked in numbers
which made the old commercial prosperity of
the city seem insignificant. Most effective&mdash;though
most demoralizing&mdash;of the gifts which Constantine
bestowed on the new capital to attract immigrants
was the old Roman privilege of free distribution of
corn to the populace. The wheat-tribute of Egypt,
which had previously formed part of the public
provision of Rome, was transferred to the use of
Constantinople, only the African corn from Carthage
<pb n='030'/><anchor id='Pg030'/>
being for the future assigned for the subsistence of
the older city.
</p>

<p>
On the completion of the dedication festival in 330
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> an imperial edict gave the city the title of New
Rome, and the record was placed on a marble tablet
near the equestrian statue of the emperor, opposite
the Strategion. But <q>New Rome</q> was a phrase
destined to subsist in poetry and rhetoric alone: the
world from the first very rightly gave the city the
founder's name only, and persisted in calling it Constantinople.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='031'/><anchor id='Pg031'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>III. The Fight With The Goths.</head>

<p>
Constantine lived seven years after he had completed
the dedication of his new city, and died in
peace and prosperity on the 22nd of May, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 337,
received on his death-bed into that Christian Church
on whose verge he had lingered during the last half
of his life. By his will he left his realm to be divided
among his sons and nephews; but a rapid succession
of murders and civil wars thinned out the imperial
house, and ended in the concentration of the whole
empire from the Forth to the Tigris under the sceptre
of Constantius II., the second son of the great emperor.
The Roman world was not yet quite ripe for a permanent
division; it was still possible to manage it from a
single centre, for by some strange chance the barbarian
invasions which had troubled the third century had
ceased for a time, and the Romans were untroubled,
save by some minor bickerings on the Rhine and the
Euphrates. Constantius II., an administrator of some
ability, but gloomy, suspicious, and unsympathetic,
was able to devote his leisure to ecclesiastical controversies,
and to dishonour himself by starting the first
<pb n='032'/><anchor id='Pg032'/>
persecution of Christian by Christian that the world
had seen. The crisis in the history of the empire was
not destined to fall in his day, nor in the short reign
of his cousin and successor, Julian, the amiable and
cultured, but entirely wrongheaded, pagan zealot,
who strove to put back the clock of time and restore
the worship of the ancient gods of Greece. Both
Constantius and Julian, if asked whence danger to the
empire might be expected, would have pointed eastward,
to the Mesopotamian frontier, where their great
enemy, Sapor King of Persia, strove, with no very
great success, to break through the line of Roman
fortresses that protected Syria and Asia Minor.
</p>

<p>
But it was not in the east that the impending storm
was really brewing. It was from the north that mischief
was to come.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/fig-08.png' rend='width: 80%'>
    <head>Gothic Idols. (<hi rend='italic'>From the Column of Arcadius.</hi>)</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
For a hundred and fifty years the Romans had
been well acquainted with the tribes of the Goths, the
most easterly of the Teutonic nations who lay along
the imperial border. All through the third century
they had been molesting the provinces of the Balkan
Peninsula by their incessant raids, as we have already
had occasion to relate. Only after a hard struggle
had they been rolled back across the Danube, and
compelled to limit their settlements to its northern
bank, in what had once been the land of the Dacians.
The last struggle with them had been in the time of
Constantine, who, in a war that lasted from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 328
to <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 332, had beaten them in the open field, compelled
their king to give his sons as hostages, and
dictated his own terms of peace. Since then the
appetite of the Goths for war and adventure seemed
<pb n='034'/><anchor id='Pg034'/>
permanently checked: for forty years they had kept
comparatively quiet and seldom indulged in raids across
the Danube. They were rapidly settling down into
steady farmers in the fertile lands on the Theiss and
the Pruth; they traded freely with the Roman towns
of Moesia; many of their young warriors enlisted
among the Roman auxiliary troops, and one considerable
body of Gothic emigrants had been permitted to
settle as subjects of the empire on the northern slope
of the Balkans. By this time many of the Goths
were becoming Christians: priests of their own blood
already ministered to them, and the Bible, translated
into their own language, was already in their hands.
One of the earliest Gothic converts, the good Bishop
Ulfilas&mdash;the first bishop of German blood that was
ever consecrated&mdash;had rendered into their idiom the
New Testament and most of the Old. A great
portion of his work still survives, incomparably the
most precious relic of the old Teutonic tongues that
we now possess.
</p>

<p>
The Goths were rapidly losing their ancient ferocity.
Compared to the barbarians who dwelt beyond them,
they might almost be called a civilized race. The
Romans were beginning to look upon them as a
guard set on the frontier to ward off the wilder peoples
that lay to their north and east. The nation was
now divided into two tribes: the Visigoths, whose
tribal name was the Thervings, lay more to the south,
in what are now the countries of Moldavia, Wallachia,
and Southern Hungary; the Ostrogoths, or tribe of
the Gruthungs, lay more to the north and east, in
Bessarabia, Transylvania, and the Dniester valley.
</p>

<pb n='035'/><anchor id='Pg035'/>

<p>
But a totally unexpected series of events were now
to show how prescient Constantine had been, in rearing
his great fortress-capital to serve as the central
place of arms of the Balkan Peninsula.
</p>

<p>
About the year <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 372 the Huns, an enormous
Tartar horde from beyond the Don and Volga, burst
into the lands north of the Euxine, and began to
work their way westward. The first tribe that lay in
their way, the nomadic race of the Alans, they almost
exterminated. Then they fell upon the Goths. The
Ostrogoths made a desperate attempt to defend the
line of the Dniester against the oncoming savages&mdash;<q>men
with faces that can hardly be called faces&mdash;rather
shapeless black collops of flesh with little points
instead of eyes; little in stature, but lithe and active,
skilful in riding, broad shouldered, good at the bow,
stiff-necked and proud, hiding under a barely human
form the ferocity of the wild beast.</q> But the enemy
whom the Gothic historian describes in these uninviting
terms was too strong for the Teutons of the
East. The Ostrogoths were crushed and compelled
to become vassals of the Huns, save a remnant who
fought their way southward to the Wallachian shore,
near the marshes of the Delta of the Danube. Then
the Huns fell on the Visigoths. The wave of invasion
pressed on; the Bug and the Pruth proved no barrier
to the swarms of nomad bowmen, and the Visigoths,
under their Duke Fritigern, fell back in dismay with
their wives and children, their waggons and flocks
and herds, till they found themselves with their backs
to the Danube. Surrender to the enemy was more
dreadful to the Visigoths than to their eastern
<pb n='036'/><anchor id='Pg036'/>
brethren; they were more civilized, most of them were
Christians, and the prospect of slavery to savages
seems to have appeared intolerable to them.
</p>

<p>
Pressed against the Danube and the Roman border,
the Visigoths sent in despair to ask permission to
cross from the Emperor. A contemporary writer
describes how they stood. <q>All the multitude that
had escaped from the murderous savagery of the
Huns&mdash;no less than 200,000 fighting men, besides
women and old men and children&mdash;-were there on the
river bank, stretching out their hands with loud
lamentations, and earnestly supplicating leave to
cross, bewailing their calamity, and promising that
they would ever faithfully adhere to the imperial
alliance if only the boon was granted them.</q>
</p>

<p>
At this moment (<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 376) the Roman Empire was
again divided. The house of Constantine was gone,
and the East was ruled by Valens, a stupid, cowardly,
and avaricious prince, who had obtained the diadem
and half the Roman world only because he was the
brother of Valentinian, the greatest general of the
day. Valentinian had taken the West for his portion,
and dwelt in his camp on the Rhine and Upper
Danube, while Valens, slothful and timid, shut himself
up with a court of slaves and flatterers in the
imperial palace at Constantinople.
</p>

<p>
The proposal of the Goths filled Valens with
dismay. It was difficult to say which was more
dangerous&mdash;to refuse a passage to 200,000 desperate
men with arms in their hands and a savage foe at
their backs, or to admit them within the line of river
and fortress that protected the border, with an implied
<pb n='037'/><anchor id='Pg037'/>
obligation to find land for them. After much doubting
he chose the latter alternative: if the Goths
would give hostages and surrender their arms, they
should be ferried across the Danube and permitted to
settle as subject-allies within the empire.
</p>

<p>
The Goths accepted the terms, gave up the sons of
their chiefs as hostages, and streamed across the river
as fast as the Roman Danube-flotilla could transport
them. But no sooner had they reached Moesia than
troubles broke out. The Roman officials at first tried
to disarm the immigrants, but the Goths were unwilling
to surrender their weapons, and offered large
bribes to be allowed to retain them: in strict disobedience
to the Emperor's orders, the bribes were
accepted and the Goths retained their arms. Further
disputes soon broke out. The provisions of Moesia
did not suffice for so many hundred thousand mouths
as had just entered its border, and Valens had
ordered stores of corn from Asia to be collected for
the use of the Goths, till they should have received
and commenced to cultivate land of their own. But
the governor, Lupicinus, to fill his own pockets, held
back the food, and doled out what he chose to give
at exorbitant prices. In sheer hunger the Goths
were driven to barter a slave for a single loaf of bread
and ten pounds of silver for a sheep. This shameless
extortion continued as long as the stores and the
patience of the Goths lasted. At last the poorer
immigrants were actually beginning to sell their own
children for slaves rather than let them starve. This
drove the Goths to desperation, and a chance affray
set the whole nation in a blaze. Fritigern, with many
<pb n='038'/><anchor id='Pg038'/>
of his nobles, was dining with Count Lupicinus at the
town of Marcianopolis, when some starving Goths
tried to pillage the market by force. A party of
Roman soldiers strove to drive them off, and were at
once mishandled or slain. On hearing the tumult
and learning its cause, Lupicinus recklessly bade his
retinue seize and slay Fritigern and the other guests
at his banquet. The Goths drew their swords and
cut their way out of the palace. Then riding to the
nearest camp of his followers, Fritigern told his tale,
and bade them take up arms against Rome.
</p>

<p>
There followed a year of desperate fighting all
along the Danube, and the northern slope of the
Balkans. The Goths half-starved for many months, and
smarting under the extortion and chicanery to which
they had been subjected, soon showed that the old
barbarian spirit was but thinly covered by the veneer
of Christianity and civilization which they had acquired
in the last half-century. The struggle resolved
itself into a repetition of the great raids of the third
century: towns were sacked and the open country
harried in the old style, nor was the war rendered less
fierce by the fact that many runaway slaves and other
outcasts among the provincial population joined the
invaders. But the Roman armies still retained their
old reputation; the ravages of the Goths were
checked at the Balkans, and though joined by the
remnants of the Ostrogoths from the Danube mouth,
as well as by other tribes flying from the Huns, the
Visigoths were at first held at bay by the imperial
armies. A desperate pitched battle at Ad Salices,
near the modern Kustendje thinned the ranks of both
sides, but led to no decisive result.
</p>

<pb n='039'/><anchor id='Pg039'/>

<p>
Next year, however, the unwarlike Emperor,
driven into the field by the clamours of his subjects,
took the field in person, with great reinforcements
brought from Asia Minor. At the same time his
nephew Gratian, a gallant young prince who had succeeded
to the Empire of the West, set forth through
Pannonia to bring aid to the lands of the Lower
Danube.
</p>

<p>
The personal intervention of Valens in the struggle
was followed by a fearful disaster. In 378 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>, the
main body of the Goths succeeded in forcing the line
of the Balkans; they were not far from Adrianople
when the Emperor started to attack them, with a
splendid army of 60,000 men. Every one expected to
hear of a victory, for the reputation of invincibility
still clung to the legions, and after six hundred years
of war the disciplined infantry of Rome, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>robur peditum</foreign>,
whose day had lasted since the Punic wars, were still
reckoned superior, when fairly handled, to any amount
of wild barbarians.
</p>

<p>
But a new chapter of the history of the art of war
was just commencing; during their sojourn in the
plains of South Russia and Roumania the Goths had
taken, first of all German races, to fighting on horseback.
Dwelling in the Ukraine they had felt the
influence of that land, ever the nurse of cavalry from
the day of the Scythian to that of the Tartar and
Cossack. They had come to <q>consider it more
honourable to fight on horse than on foot,</q> and every
chief was followed by his war-band of mounted men.
Driven against their will into conflict with the empire,
they found themselves face to face into the army that
<pb n='040'/><anchor id='Pg040'/>
had so long held the world in fear, and had turned
back their own ancestors in rout three generations
before.
</p>

<p>
Valens found the main body of the Goths encamped
in a great <q>laager,</q> on the plain north of Adrianople.
After some abortive negotiations he developed an
attack on their front, when suddenly a great body of
horsemen charged in on the Roman flank. It was
the main strength of the Gothic cavalry, which had
been foraging at a distance; receiving news of the
fight it had ridden straight for the battle field. Some
Roman squadrons which covered the left flank of the
Emperor's army were ridden down and trampled
under foot. Then the Goths swept down on the
infantry of the left wing, rolled it up, and drove it in
upon the centre. So tremendous was their impact
that legions and cohorts were pushed together in
hopeless confusion. Every attempt to stand firm
failed, and in a few minutes left, centre, and reserve,
were one undistinguishable mass. Imperial guards,
light troops, lancers, auxiliaries, and infantry of the
line were wedged together in a press that grew closer
every moment. The Roman cavalry saw that the
day was lost, and rode off without another effort.
Then the abandoned infantry realized the horror of
their position: equally unable to deploy or to fly,
they had to stand to be cut down. Men could not
raise their arms to strike a blow, so closely were they
packed; spears snapped right and left, their bearers
being unable to lift them to a vertical position; many
soldiers were stifled in the press. Into this quivering
mass the Goths rode, plying lance and sword against
<pb n='041'/><anchor id='Pg041'/>
the helpless enemy. It was not till forty thousand men
had fallen that the thinning of the ranks enabled the
survivors to break out and follow their cavalry in a
headlong flight. They left behind them, dead on the
field, the Emperor, the Grand Masters of the Infantry
and Cavalry, the Count of the Palace, and thirty-five
commanders of different corps.
</p>

<p>
The battle of Adrianople was the most fearful
defeat suffered by a Roman army since Cannæ, a
slaughter to which it is aptly compared by the contemporary
historian Ammianus Marcellinus. The
army of the East was almost annihilated, and was
never reorganized again on the old Roman lines.
</p>

<p>
This awful catastrophe brought down on Constantinople
the first attack which it experienced since it
had changed its name from Byzantium. After a vain
assault on Adrianople, the victorious Goths pressed
rapidly on towards the imperial city. Harrying the
whole country side as they passed by, they presented
themselves before the <q>Golden Gate,</q> its south-western
exit. But the attack was destined to come
to nothing: <q>their courage failed them when they
looked on the vast circuit of walls and the enormous
extent of streets; all that mass of riches within
appeared inaccessible to them. They cast away the
siege machines which they had prepared, and rolled
backward on to Thrace.</q><note place='foot'>Ammianus Marcellinus.</note> Beyond skirmishing under
the walls with a body of Saracen cavalry which had
been brought up to strengthen the garrison, they
made no hostile attempt on the city. So forty years
after his death, Constantine's prescience was for the
<pb n='042'/><anchor id='Pg042'/>
first time justified. He was right in believing that an
impregnable city on the Bosphorus would prove the
salvation of the Balkan Peninsula even if all its open
country were overrun by the invader.
</p>

<p>
The unlucky Valens was succeeded on the throne
by Theodosius, a wise and virtuous prince, who set
himself to repair, by caution and courage combined,
the disaster that had shaken the Roman power in the
Danube lands. With the remnants of the army of
the East he made head against the barbarians; without
venturing to attack their main body, he destroyed
many marauders and scattered bands, and made the
continuance of the war profitless to them. If they
dispersed to plunder they were cut off; if they held
together in masses they starved. Presently Fritigern
died, and Theodosius made peace with his successor
Athanarich, a king who had lately come over the
Danube at the head of a new swarm of Goths from
the Carpathian country. Theodosius frankly promised
and faithfully observed the terms that Fritigern had
asked of Valens ten years before. He granted the
Goths land for their settlement in the Thracian
province which they had wasted, and enlisted in his
armies all the chiefs and their war-bands. Within
ten years after the fight of Adrianople he had forty
thousand Teutonic horsemen in his service; they
formed the best and most formidable part of his host,
and were granted a higher pay than the native
Roman soldiery. The immediate military results of
the policy of Theodosius were not unsatisfactory; it
was his Gothic auxiliaries who won for him his two
great victories over the legions of the West, when in
<pb n='044'/><anchor id='Pg044'/>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 388 he conquered the rebel Magnus Maximus,
and in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 394 the rebel Eugenius.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/fig-09.png' rend='width: 80%'>
    <head>Gothic Captives. (<hi rend='italic'>From the Column of Arcadius.</hi>)</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
But from the political side the experiment of
Theodosius was fraught with the greatest danger that
the Roman Empire had yet known. When barbarian
auxiliaries had been enlisted before, they had been
placed under Roman leaders and mixed with equal
numbers of Roman troops. To leave them under
their own chiefs, and deliberately favour them at the
expense of the native soldiery, was a most unhappy
experiment. It practically put the command of the
empire in their hands; for there was no hold over them
save their personal loyalty to Theodosius, and the
spell which the grandeur of the Roman name and
Roman culture still exercised over their minds. That
spell was still strong, as is shown in the story which
the Gothic historian Jornandes tells about the visit
of the old King Athanarich to Constantinople.
<q>When he entered the royal city, <q>Now,</q> said he,
<q>do I at last behold what I had often heard and
deemed incredible.</q> He passed his eyes hither and
thither admiring first the site of the city, then the
fleets of corn-ships, then the lofty walls, then the
crowds of people of all nations, mingled as the waters
from divers springs mix in a single pool, then the
ranks of disciplined soldiery. And at last he cried
aloud, <q>Doubtless the Emperor is as a god on earth,
and he who raises a hand against him is guilty of his
own blood.</q></q> But this impression was not to continue
for long. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 395, the good Emperor
Theodosius, <q>the lover of peace and of the Goths,</q>
as he was called, died, and left the throne to his two
weakly sons Arcadius and Honorius.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='045'/><anchor id='Pg045'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>IV. The Departure Of The Germans.</head>

<p>
The Roman Empire, at the end of the fourth
century, was in a condition which made the experiment
of Theodosius particularly dangerous. The
government was highly centralized and bureaucratic;
hosts of officials, appointed directly from Constantinople,
administered every provincial post from the
greatest to the least. There was little local self-government
and no local patriotism. The civil
population was looked on by the bureaucratic caste
as a multitude without rights or capacities, existing
solely for the purpose of paying taxes. So strongly
was this view held, that to prevent the revenue from
suffering, the land-holding classes, from the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>curialis</foreign>,
or local magnate, down to the poorest peasant, were
actually forbidden to move from one district to
another without special permission. A landowner
was even prohibited from enlisting in the army, unless
he could show that he left an heir behind him capable
of paying his share in the local rates. An almost
entire separation existed between the civil population
and the military caste; it was hard for a civilian of
any position to enlist; only the lower classes&mdash;who
<pb n='046'/><anchor id='Pg046'/>
were of no account in tax-paying&mdash;were suffered to
join the army. On the other hand, every pressure
was used to make the sons of soldiers continue in the
service. Thus had arisen a purely professional army,
which had no sympathy or connection with the
unarmed provincials whom it protected.
</p>

<p>
The army had been a source of unending trouble in
the third century; for a hundred years it had made
and unmade Cæsars at its pleasure. That was while
it was still mainly composed of men born within the
empire, and officered by Romans.
</p>

<p>
But Theodosius had now swamped the native
element in the army by his wholesale enlistment of
Gothic war-bands. And he had, moreover, handed
many of the chief military posts to Teutons. Some
of them indeed had married Roman wives and taken
kindly to Roman modes of life, while nearly all had
professed Christianity. But at the best they were
military adventurers of alien blood while at the
worst they were liable to relapse into barbarism, cast
all their loyalty and civilization to the winds, and
take to harrying the empire again in the old fearless
fashion of the third century. Clearly nothing could
be more dangerous than to hand over the protection
of the timid and unarmed civil population to such
guardians. The contempt they must have felt for the
unwarlike provincials was so great, and the temptation
to plunder the wealthy cities of the empire so
constant and pressing, that it is no wonder if the
Teutons yielded. Cæsar-making seemed as easy
to the leaders as the sack of provincial churches and
treasuries did to the rank and file.
</p>

<pb n='047'/><anchor id='Pg047'/>

<p>
When the personal ascendency of Theodosius was
removed, the empire fell at once into the troubles
which were inevitable. Both at the court of Arcadius,
who reigned at Constantinople, and at that of
Honorius, who had received the West as his share, a
war of factions commenced between the German and
the Roman party. Theodosius had distributed so many
high military posts to Goths and other Teutons, that
this influence was almost unbounded. Stilicho
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Magister militum</foreign> (commander-in-chief) of the armies
of Italy was predominant at the council board of
Honorius; though he was a pure barbarian by
blood, Theodosius had married him to his own niece
Serena, and left him practically supreme in the West,
for the young emperor was aged only eleven. In the
East Arcadius, the elder brother, had attained his
eighteenth year, and might have ruled his own realm
had he possessed the energy. But he was a witless
young man, <q>short, thin, and sallow, so inactive that
he seldom spoke, and always looked as if he was
about to fall asleep.</q> His prime minister was a
Western Roman named Rufinus, but before the first
year of his reign was over, a Gothic captain named
Gainas slew Rufinus at a review, before the Emperor's
very eyes. The weak Arcadius was then compelled
to make the eunuch Eutropius his minister, and to
appoint Gainas <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Magister militum</foreign> for the East.
</p>

<p>
Gainas and Stilicho contented themselves with
wire-pulling at Court; but another Teutonic leader
thought that the time had come for bolder work.
Alaric was a chief sprung from the family of the
Balts, whom the Goths reckoned next to the god-descended
<pb n='048'/><anchor id='Pg048'/>
Amals among their princely houses. He
was young, daring, and untameable; several years
spent at Constantinople had failed to civilize him,
but had succeeded in filling him with contempt for
Roman effeminacy. Soon after the death of Theodosius,
he raised the Visigoths in revolt, making it his
pretext that the advisers of Arcadius were refusing
the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>foederati</foreign>, or auxiliaries, certain arrears of pay. The
Teutonic sojourners in Moesia and Thrace joined him
almost to a man, and the Constantinopolitan government
found itself with only a shadow of an army to
oppose the rebels. Alaric wandered far and wide,
from the Danube to the gates of Constantinople, and
from Constantinople to Greece, ransoming or sacking
every town in his way till the Goths were gorged with
plunder. No one withstood him save Stilicho, who was
summoned from the West to aid his master's brother.
By skilful manœuvres Stilicho blockaded Alaric in a
mountain position in Arcadia; but when he had him
at his mercy, it was found that <q>dog does not eat
dog.</q> The Teutonic prime minister let the Teutonic
rebel escape him, and the Visigoths rolled north again
into Illyricum. Sated with plunder, Alaric then consented
to grant Arcadius peace, on condition that he
was made a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Magister militum</foreign> like Stilicho and Gainas,
and granted as much land for his tribesmen as he
chose to ask. [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 396.]
</p>

<p>
For the next five years Alaric, now proclaimed
King of the Goths by his victorious soldiery, reigned
with undisputed sway over the eastern parts of the
Balkan Peninsula, paying only a shadow of homage
to the royal phantom at Constantinople. There
<pb n='049'/><anchor id='Pg049'/>
appeared every reason to believe that a German
kingdom was about to be permanently established in
the lands south and west of the Danube. The fate
which actually befell Gaul, Spain, and Britain, a few
years later seemed destined for Moesia and Macedonia.
How different the history of Europe would have
been if the Germans had settled down in Servia and
Bulgaria we need hardly point out.
</p>

<p>
But another series of events was impending. In
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 401, Alaric, instead of resuming his attacks on
Constantinople, suddenly declared war on the
Western Emperor Honorius. He marched round the
head of the Adriatic and invaded Northern Italy.
The half-Romanized Stilicho, who wished to keep
the rule of the West to himself, fought hard to turn
the Goths out of Italy, and beat back Alaric's first
invasion. But then the young emperor, who was as
weak and more worthless than his brother Arcadius,
slew the great minister on a charge of treason. When
Stilicho was gone, Alaric had everything his own
way; he moved with the whole Visigothic race into
Italy, where he ranged about at his will, ransoming
and plundering every town from Rome downwards.
The Visigoths are heard of no more in the Balkan
Peninsula; they now pass into the history of Italy and
then into that of Spain.
</p>

<p>
While Alaric's eyes were turned on Italy, but
before he had actually come into conflict with Stilicho,
the Court of Constantinople had been the
seat of grave troubles. Gainas the Gothic <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Magister
militum</foreign> of the East, and his creature, the eunuch
Eutropius, had fallen out, and the man of war had no
<pb n='050'/><anchor id='Pg050'/>
difficulty in disposing of the wretched harem-bred
Grand Chamberlain. Instigated by Gainas, the German
mercenaries in the army of Asia started an
insurrection under a certain Tribigild. Gainas was
told to march against them, and collected troops
ostensibly for that purpose. But when he was at the
head of a considerable army, he did not attack the
rebels, but sent a message to Constantinople bidding
Arcadius give up to him the obnoxious Grand
Chamberlain. Eutropius, hearing of his danger, threw
himself on the protection of the Church: he fled into
the Cathedral of St. Sophia and clung to the altar.
John Chrysostom, the intrepid Patriarch of Constantinople,
forbade the soldiers to enter the church, and
protected the fugitive for some days. One of the
most striking incidents in the history of St. Sophia
followed: while the cowering Chamberlain lay before
the altar, John preached to a crowded congregation
a sermon on the text, <q>Vanity of vanities, all is
vanity,</q> emphasizing every period of his harangue
by pointing to the fallen Eutropius&mdash;prime minister of
the empire yesterday, and a hunted criminal to-day.
The patriarch extorted a promise that the eunuch's
life should be spared, and Eutropius gave himself up.
Arcadius banished him to Cyprus, but the inexorable
Gainas was not contented with his rival's removal; he
had Eutropius brought back to Constantinople and
beheaded.
</p>

<p>
The <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Magister militum</foreign> now brought his army over
to Constantinople, and quartered it there to overawe
the emperor. It appeared quite likely that ere long
the Germans would sack the city; but the fate that
<pb n='051'/><anchor id='Pg051'/>
befell Rome ten years later was not destined for Constantinople.
A mere chance brawl put the domination
of Gainas to a sudden end. He himself and
many of his troops were outside the city, when a
sudden quarrel at one of the gates between a band of
Goths and some riotous citizens brought about a
general outbreak against the Germans. The Constantinopolitan
mob showed itself more courageous
and not less unruly than the Roman mob of elder
days. The whole population turned out with extemporized
arms and attacked the German soldiery.
The gates were closed to prevent Gainas and his
troops from outside returning, and a desperate street-fight
ranged over the entire city. Isolated bodies of the
Germans were cut off one by one, and at last their
barracks were surrounded and set on fire. The rioters
had the upper hand; seven thousand soldiers fell, and
the remnant thought themselves lucky to escape.
Gainas at once declared open war on the empire,
but he had not the genius of Alaric, nor the numerical
strength that had followed the younger chief. He
was beaten in the field and forced to fly across the
Danube, where he was caught and beheaded by
Uldes, King of the Huns. Curiously enough the
officer who defeated Gainas was himself not only a
Goth but a heathen: he was named Fravitta and had
been the sworn guest-friend of Theodosius, whose
son he faithfully defended even against the assault of
his own countrymen, [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 401.]
</p>

<p>
The departure of Alaric and the death of Gainas
freed the Eastern Romans from the double danger
that has impended over them. They were neither
<pb n='052'/><anchor id='Pg052'/>
to see an independent German kingdom on the
Danube and Morava, nor to remain under the rule of a
semi-civilized German <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Magister militum</foreign>, making and
unmaking ministers, and perhaps Cæsars, at his good
pleasure. The weak Arcadius was enabled to spend
the remaining seven years of his life in comparative
peace and quiet. His court was only troubled by
an open war between his spouse, the Empress Ælia
Eudoxia, and John Chrysostom, the Patriarch of
Constantinople. John was a man of saintly life and
apostolic fervour, but rash and inconsiderate alike in
speech and action. His charity and eloquence made
him the idol of the populace of the imperial city, but
his austere manners and autocratic methods of dealing
with his subordinates had made him many foes among
the clergy. The patriarch's enemies were secretly
supported by the empress, who had taken offence at
the outspoken way in which John habitually denounced
the luxury and insolence of her court. She favoured
the intrigues of Theophilus, Patriarch of Alexandria,
against his brother prelate, backed the Asiatic clergy
in their complaints about John's oppression of them,
and at last induced the Emperor to allow the saintly
patriarch to be deposed by a hastily-summoned
council, the <q>Synod of the Oak</q> held outside the
city. The populace rose at once to defend their
pastor; riots broke out, Theodosius was chased back
to Egypt, and the Emperor, terrified by an earthquake
which seemed to manifest the wrath of heaven,
restored John to his place.
</p>

<p>
Next year, however, the war between the empress
and the patriarch broke out again. John took the
<pb n='053'/><anchor id='Pg053'/>
occasion of the erection of a statue of Eudoxia in
the Augustaeum to recommence his polemics. Some
obsolete semi-pagan ceremonies at its dedication
roused his wrath, and he delivered a scathing sermon
in which&mdash;if his enemies are to be believed&mdash;he compared
the empress to Herodias, and himself to John
the Baptist. The Emperor, at his wife's demand,
summoned another council, which condemned
Chrysostom, and on Easter Day, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 404, seized the
patriarch in his cathedral by armed force, and
banished him to Asia. That night a fire, probably
kindled by the angry adherents of Chrysostom,
broke out in St. Sophia, which was burnt to the
ground. From thence it spread to the neighbouring
buildings, and finally to the Senate-house, which was
consumed with all the treasures of ancient Greek art
of which Constantine had made it the repository.
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile the exiled John was banished to a
dreary mountain fastness in Cappadocia, and afterwards
condemned to a still more remote prison at
Pityus on the Euxine. He died on his way thither,
leaving a wonderful reputation for patience and cheerfulness
under affliction. This fifth-century Becket
was well-nigh the only patriarch of Constantinople
who ever fell out with the imperial Court on a question
of morals as distinguished from dogma. Chrysostom's
quarrel was with the luxury, insolence, and frivolity of
the Empress and her Court; no real ecclesiastical
question was involved in his deposition, for the
charges against him were mere pretexts to cover the
hatred of his disloyal clergy and the revenge of the
insulted Aelia Eudoxia. [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 407.]
</p>

</div>

<pb n='054'/><anchor id='Pg054'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>V. The Reorganization Of The Eastern Empire.
(<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 408-518.)</head>

<p>
The feeble and inert Arcadius died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 408, at
the early age of thirty-one; his imperious consort had
preceded him to the grave, and the empire of the
East was left to Theodosius II., a child of seven years,
their only son. There was hardly an instance in
Roman history of a minor succeeding quietly to his
father's throne. An ambitious relative or a disloyal
general had habitually supplanted the helpless heir.
But the ministers of Arcadius were exceptionally
virtuous or exceptionally destitute of ambition. The
little emperor was duly crowned, and the administration
of the East undertaken in his name by the able
Anthemius, who held the office of Praetorian Praefect.
History relates nothing but good of this minister; he
made a wise commercial treaty with the king of Persia;
he repelled with ease a Hunnish invasion of Moesia;
he built a flotilla on the Danube, where Roman warships
had not been seen since the death of Valens,
forty years before; he reorganized the corn supply
<pb n='055'/><anchor id='Pg055'/>
of Constantinople; and did much to get back into
order and cultivation the desolated north-western
lands of the Balkan Peninsula, from which Alaric
and his Visigothic hordes had now taken their final
departure. The empire was still more indebted to
him for bringing up the young Theodosius as an
honest and god-fearing man. The palace under
Anthemius' rule was the school of the virtues: the
lives of the emperor and his three sisters, Pulcheria,
Arcadia, and Marina, were the model and the marvel
of their subjects. Theodosius inherited the piety
and honesty of his grandfather and namesake, but
was a youth of slender capacity, though he took
some interest in literature, and was renowned for his
beautiful penmanship. His eldest sister, Pulcheria,
was the ruling spirit of the family, and possessed
unlimited influence over him, though she was but two
years his senior. When Anthemius died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
414, she took the title of Augusta, and assumed the
regency of the East. Pulcheria was an extraordinary
woman: on gathering up the reins of power she took
a vow of chastity, and lived as a crowned nun for
thirty-six years; her fear had been that, if she married,
her husband might cherish ambitious schemes against
her brother's crown; she therefore kept single herself
and persuaded her sisters to make a similar vow.
Austere, indefatigable, and unselfish, she proved equal
to ruling the realms of the East with success, though
no woman had ever made the attempt before.
</p>

<p>
When Theodosius came of age he refused to remove
his sister from power, and treated her as his
colleague and equal. By her advice he married in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
<pb n='056'/><anchor id='Pg056'/>
421, the year that he came of age, the beautiful and
accomplished Athenaïs, daughter of the philosopher
Leontius. The emperor's chosen spouse had been
brought up as a pagan, but was converted before her
marriage, and baptized by the name of Eudocia.
She displayed her literary tastes in writing religious
poetry, which had some merit, according to the critics
of the succeeding age. The austere Pulcheria&mdash;always
immersed in state business or occupied in religious
observances&mdash;found herself ere long ill at ease in the
company of the lively, beautiful, and volatile literary
lady whom she had chosen as sister-in-law. If
Theodosius had been less easy-going and good-hearted
he must have sent away either his sister
or his wife, but he long contrived to dwell affectionately
with both, though their bickerings were unending.
After many years of married life, however,
a final quarrel came, and the empress retired to spend
the last years of her life in seclusion at Jerusalem.
The cause of her exile is not really known: we have
only a wild story concerning it, which finds an exact
parallel in one of the tales of the <q>Arabian Nights.</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<q>The emperor,</q> so runs the tale, <q>was one day met by a peasant
who presented him with a Phrygian apple of enormous size, so that
the whole Court marvelled at it. And he gave the man a hundred and
fifty gold pieces in reward, and sent the apple to the Empress Eudocia.
But she sent it as a present to Paulinus, the <q>Master of the Offices,</q>
because he was a friend of the emperor. But Paulinus, not knowing
the history of the apple, took it and gave it to the emperor as he
reëntered the Palace. And Theodosius having received it, recognized
it and concealed it, and called his wife and questioned her, saying,
<q>Where is the apple that I sent you?</q> She answered, <q>I have eaten
it.</q> Then he bade her swear by his salvation the truth, whether she
had eaten it or sent it to some one. And Eudocia swore that she had
<pb n='057'/><anchor id='Pg057'/>
sent it to no man, but had herself eaten it. Then the emperor showed
her the apple, and was exceedingly wrath, suspecting that she was
enamoured of Paulinus, and had sent it to him as a love-gift; for he
was a very handsome man. And on this account he put Paulinus to
death, but he permitted Eudocia to go to the Holy Places to pray.
And she went down from Constantinople to Jerusalem, and dwelt there
all her days.</q>
</quote>

<p>
That Paulinus was executed, and that Eudocia
spent her last years of retirement in Palestine, we
know for certain. All the rest of the story is in
reality hidden from us. The chief improbability of
the tale is that Eudocia had reached the age of forty
when the breach between her and her husband took
place, and that Paulinus was also an official of mature
years.
</p>

<p>
Theodosius' long reign passed by in comparative
quiet. Its only serious troubles were a short war
with the Persians, and a longer one with Attila, the
great king of the Huns, whose empire now stretched
over all the lands north of the Black Sea and Danube,
where the Goths had once dwelt. In this struggle
the Roman armies were almost invariably unfortunate.
The Huns ravaged the country as far as Adrianople
and Philippopolis, and had to be bought off by the
annual payment of 700 lbs. of gold [£31,000]. It is
true that they fell on Theodosius while his main force
was engaged on the Persian frontier, but the constant
ill-success of the imperial generals seems to show that
the armies of the East had never been properly reorganized
since the military system of Theodosius I.
had been broken up by the revolt of Gainas forty
years before. His grandson had neither a trustworthy
body of German auxiliaries nor a sufficiently large
<pb n='059'/><anchor id='Pg059'/>
native levy of born subjects of the empire to protect
his borders.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/fig-10.png' rend='width: 60%'>
    <head>Angel Of Victory. (<hi rend='italic'>From a Fifth-century Diptych.</hi>)
<hi rend='italic'>Reproduced from "L'Art Byzantin." Par Charles Bayet.
Paris, Quantin, 1883.</hi></head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
The reconstruction of the Roman military forces
was reserved for the successors of Theodosius II.
He himself was killed by a fall from his horse in
450 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>, leaving an only daughter, who was married
to her cousin Valentinian III., Emperor of the West.
Theodosius, with great wisdom, had designated as
his successor, not his young-son-in-law, a cruel
and profligate prince, but his sister Pulcheria, who
at the same time ended her vow of celibacy and
married Marcianus, a veteran soldier and a prominent
member of the Senate. The marriage was but formal,
for both were now well advanced in years: as a
political expedient it was all that could be desired.
The empire had peace and prosperity under their
rule, and freed itself from the ignominious tribute to
the Huns. Before Attila died in 452, he had met
and been checked by the succours which Marcianus
sent to the distressed Romans of the West.
</p>

<p>
When Marcianus and Pulcheria passed away, the
empire came into the hands of a series of three men
of ability. They were all bred as high civil officials,
not as generals; all ascended the throne at a ripe
age; not one of them won his crown by arms, all were
peaceably designated either by their predecessors, or
by the Senate and army. These princes were Leo I.
(457-474), Zeno (474-491), Anastasius (491-518). Their
chief merit was that they guided the Roman Empire
in the East safely through the stormy times which
saw its extinction in the West. While, beyond the
Adriatic, province after province was being lopped
<pb n='060'/><anchor id='Pg060'/>
off and formed into a new Germanic kingdom, the
emperors who reigned at Constantinople kept a tight
grip on the Balkan Peninsula and on Asia, and succeeded
in maintaining their realm absolutely intact.
Both East and West were equally exposed to the
barbarian in the fifth century, and the difference of
their fate came from the character of their rulers, not
from the diversity of their political conditions. In
the West, after the extinction of the house of
Theodosius (455 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>), the emperors were ephemeral
puppets, made and unmade by the generals of their
armies, who were invariably Germans. The two
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Magistri militum</foreign>, Ricimer and Gundovald&mdash;one
Suabian, the other Burgundian by birth&mdash;deposed or
slew no less than five of their nominal masters in
seventeen years. In the East, on the other hand, it
was the emperors who destroyed one after another
the ambitious generals, who, by arms or intrigue,
threatened their throne.
</p>

<p>
While this comparison bears witness to the personal
ability of the three emperors who ruled at Constantinople
between <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 457 and <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 518, it is only fair to
remember they were greatly helped by the fact that
the German element in their armies had never reached
the pitch of power to which it had attained in the
West; the suppression of Gainas forty years before
had saved them from that danger. But unruly and
aspiring generals were not wanting in the East; the
greatest danger of Leo I. was the conspiracy of the
great <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Magister militum</foreign> Aspar, whom he detected and
slew when he was on the eve of rebelling. Zeno was
once chased out of his capital by rebels, and twice
<pb n='061'/><anchor id='Pg061'/>
vexed by dangerous risings in Asia Minor, but on
each occasion he triumphed over his adversaries, and
celebrated his victory by the execution of the leaders
of the revolt. Anastasius was vexed for several years
by the raids of a certain Count Vitalian, who ranged
over the Thracian provinces with armies recruited
from the barbarians beyond the Danube. But, in
spite of all these rebellions, the empire was never in
serious danger of sinking into disorder or breaking
up, as the Western realm had done, into new un-Roman
kingdoms. So far was it from this fate, that
Anastasius left his successor, when he died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 518,
a loyal army of 150,000 men, a treasure of 320,000 lbs.
of gold, and an unbroken frontier to East and West.
</p>

<p>
The main secret of the success of the emperors of
the fifth century in holding their own came from the
fact that they had reorganized their armies, and filled
them up with native troops in great numbers. Leo I.
was the first ruler who utilized the military virtues of
the Isaurians, or mountain populations of Southern
Asia Minor. He added several regiments of them
to the army of the East, but it was his son-in-law
and successor, Zeno, himself an Isaurian born, who
developed the scheme. He raised an imperial guard
from his countrymen, and enlisted as many corps
of them as could be raised; moreover, he formed
regiments of Armenians and other inhabitants of the
Roman frontier of the East, and handed over to his
successor, Anastasius, an army in which the barbarian
auxiliaries&mdash;now composed of Teutons and Huns in
about equal numbers&mdash;were decidedly dominated by
the native elements.
</p>

<pb n='062'/><anchor id='Pg062'/>

<p>
The last danger which the Eastern Empire was to
experience from the hands of the Germans fell into
the reign of Zeno. The Ostrogoths had submitted
to the Huns ninety years before, when their brethren
the Visigoths fled into Roman territory, in the
reign of Valens. But when the Hunnish Empire
broke up at the death of Attila [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 452], the Ostrogoths
freed themselves, and replaced their late masters
as the main danger on the Danube. The bulk
of them streamed south-westward, and settled in
Pannonia, the border-province of the Western Empire,
on the frontier of the East-Roman districts of Dacia
and Moesia. They soon fell out with Zeno, and two
Ostrogothic chiefs, Theodoric, the son of Theodemir,
and Theodoric, the son of Triarius, were the scourges
of the Balkan Peninsula for more than twenty years.
While the bulk of their tribesmen settled down on the
banks of the Save and Mid-Danube, the two Theodorics
harried the whole of Macedonia and Moesia by
never-ending raids. Zeno tried to turn them against
each other, offering first to the one, then to the other,
the title of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Magister militum</foreign>, and a large pension.
But now&mdash;as in the time of Alaric and Stilicho&mdash;it
was seen that <q>dog will not eat dog</q>; the two
Theodorics, after quarrelling for a while, banded
themselves together against Zeno. The story of their
reconciliation is curious.
</p>

<p>
Theodoric, the son of Theodemir, the ally of Rome
for the moment, had surrounded his rival on a rocky
hill in a defile of the Balkans. While they lay
opposite each other, Theodoric, the son of Triarius
[he is usually known as Theodoric the One-Eyed],
<pb n='063'/><anchor id='Pg063'/>
rode down to his enemy's lines and called to him,
<q>Madman, betrayer of your race, do you not see that
the Roman plan is always to destroy Goths by Goths?
Whichever of us fails, they, not we, will be the
stronger. They never give you real help, but send
you out against me to perish here in the Desert.</q>
Then all the Goths cried out, <q>The One-Eyed is
right. These men are Goths like ourselves.</q> So the
two Theodorics made peace, and Zeno had to cope
with them both at once [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 479]. Two years later
Theodoric the One-Eyed was slain by accident&mdash;his
horse flung him, as he mounted, against a spear fixed
by the door of his tent&mdash;but his namesake continued
a thorn in the side of the empire till 488 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
</p>

<p>
In that year Zeno bethought him of a device for ridding
himself of the Ostrogoth, who, though he made
no permanent settlement in Moesia or Macedonia,
was gradually depopulating the realm by his incursions.
The line of ephemeral emperors who reigned
in Italy over the shrunken Western realm had ended
in 476, when the German general Odoacer deposed
Romulus Augustulus, and did not trouble himself to
nominate another puppet-Cæsar to succeed him.
By his order a deputation from the Roman Senate
visited Zeno at Constantinople, to inform him that
they did not require an emperor of their own to
govern Italy, but would acknowledge him as ruler
alike of East and West; at the same time they besought
Zeno to nominate, as his representative in the
Italian lands, their defender, the great Odoacer. Zeno
replied by advising the Romans to persuade Odoacer
to recognize as his lord Julius Nepos, one of the
<pb n='064'/><anchor id='Pg064'/>
dethroned nominees of Ricimer, who had survived his
loss of the imperial diadem. Odoacer refused, and
proclaimed himself king in Italy, while still affecting&mdash;against
Zeno's own will&mdash;to recognize the Constantinopolitan
emperor as his suzerain.
</p>

<p>
In 488 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> it occurred to Zeno to offer Theodoric
the government of Italy, if he would conquer it from
Odoacer. The Ostrogoth, who had harried the inland
of the Balkan Peninsula bare, and had met
several reverses of late from the Roman arms, took
the offer. He was made <q>patrician</q> and consul, and
started off with all the Ostrogothic nation at his back
to win the realm of Italy. After hard fighting with
Odoacer and the mixed multitude of mercenaries
that followed him, the Goths conquered Italy, and
Theodoric&mdash;German king and Roman patrician&mdash;began
to reign at Ravenna. He always professed to
be the vassal and deputy of the emperor at Constantinople,
and theoretically his conquest of Italy
meant the reunion of the East and the West. But
the Western realm had shrunk down to Italy and
Illyricum, and the power of Zeno therein was purely
nominal.
</p>

<p>
With the departure of the Ostrogoths we have
seen our last of the Germans in the Balkan Peninsula;
after 488 the Slavs take their place as the molesters
of the Roman frontier on the Danube.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='065'/><anchor id='Pg065'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>VI. Justinian.</head>

<p>
The Emperor Anastasius died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 518 at the
ripe age of eighty-eight, and his sceptre passed to
Justinus, the commander of his body-guard, whom
Senate and army alike hailed as most worthy to
succeed the good old man. The late emperor had
nephews, but he had never designated them as his
heirs, and they retired into private life at his death.
Justinus was well advanced in years, as all his three
predecessors had been when they mounted the throne.
But unlike Leo, Zeno, and Anastasius, he had won
his way to the front in the army, not in the civil
service. He had risen from the ranks, was a rough
uncultured soldier, and is said to have been hardly able
to sign his own name. His reign of nine years would
have been of little note in history&mdash;for he made no
wars and spent no treasure&mdash;if he had not been the
means of placing on the throne of the East the
greatest ruler since the death of Constantine.
</p>

<p>
Justinus had no children himself, but had adopted
as his heir his nephew Justinian, son of his deceased
brother Sabatius. This young man, born after his
<pb n='066'/><anchor id='Pg066'/>
father and uncle had won their way to high places in
the army, was no uncultured peasant as they had been,
but had been reared, as the heir of a wealthy house,
in all the learning of the day. He showed from the
first a keen intelligence, and applied himself with
zeal to almost every department of civil life. Law,
finance, administrative economy, theology, music,
architecture, fortification, all were dear to him. The
only thing in which he seems to have taken little personal
interest was military matters. His uncle trusted
everything to him, and finally made him his colleague
on the throne.
</p>

<p>
Justinian was heir designate to the empire, and had
passed the age of thirty-five, giving his contemporaries
the impression that he was a staid, business-like, and
eminently practical personage. <q>No one ever remembered
him young,</q> it was said, and most certainly
no one ever expected him to scandalize the empire
by a sensational marriage. But in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 526 the world
learnt, to the horror of the respectable and the joy of
all scandal-mongers, that he had declared his intention
of taking to wife the dancer Theodora, the star of the
Byzantine comic stage.
</p>

<p>
So many stories have gathered around Theodora's
name that it is hard to say how far her early life had
been discreditable. A libellous work called the <q>Secret
History,</q> written by an enemy of herself and her
husband,<note place='foot'>Certainly not by Procopius, whose name it bears.</note> gives us many scandalous details of her
career; but the very virulence of the book makes its
tales incredible. It is indisputable, however, that
Theodora was an actress, and that Roman actresses
<pb n='067'/><anchor id='Pg067'/>
enjoyed an unenviable reputation for light morals.
There was actually a law which forbade a member of
the senate to marry an actress, and Justinian had to
repeal it in order to legalize his own marriage. There
had been scores of bad and reckless men on the
throne before, but none of them had ever dared to
commit an action which startled the world half so
much as this freak of the staid Justinian. His own
mother used every effort to turn him from his purpose,
and his uncle the Emperor threatened to disinherit
him: but he was quietly persistent, and ere
the aged Justinus died he had been induced to acknowledge
the marriage of his nephew, and to confer
on Theodora the title of <q>Patrician.</q>
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/fig-11.png' rend='width: 80%'>
    <head>The Empress Theodora And Her Court.
<hi rend='italic'>Reproduced from "L'Art Byzantin." Par Charles Bayet. Paris, Quantin, 1883.</hi></head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Theodora, as even her enemies allow, was the most
beautiful woman of her age. Procopius, the best
historian of the day, says <q>that it was impossible for
mere man to describe her comeliness in words, or
imitate it in art.</q> All that her detractors could say
was that she was below the middle height, and that
her complexion was rather pale, though not unhealthy.
It is unfortunate that we have no representation of
her surviving, save the famous mosaic in San Vitale
at Ravenna, and mosaic is of all forms of art that
least suited to reproduce beauty.
</p>

<p>
Whatever her early life may have been, Theodora
was in spirit and intelligence well suited to be the
mate of the Emperor of the East. After her marriage
no word of scandal was breathed against her
life. She rose to the height of her situation: once
her courage saved her husband's throne, and always she
was the ablest and the most trusted of his councillors.
<pb n='069'/><anchor id='Pg069'/>
The grave, studious, and hard-working Emperor never
regretted his choice of a consort.
</p>

<p>
It cannot be said, however, that either Justinian or
Theodora are sympathetic characters. The Emperor
was a hard and suspicious master, and not over grateful
to subjects who served him well; he was intolerant
in religious, and unscrupulous in political matters.
When his heart was set on a project he was utterly
unmindful of the slaughter and ruin which it might
bring upon his people. In the extent of his conquests
and the magnificence of his public works, he was incomparably
the greatest of the emperors who reigned
at Constantinople. But the greatness was purely
personal: he left the empire weaker in resources, if
broader in provinces, than he found it. Of all the
great sovereigns of history he may be most fairly
compared with Louis XIV. of France; but it may be
remembered to his credit in the comparison that Louis
has nothing to set against Justinian's great legal work&mdash;the
compilation of the <hi rend='italic'>Pandects</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Institutes</hi>, and that
Justinian's private life, unlike that of the Frenchman,
was strict even to austerity. All night long, we read,
he sat alone over his State papers in his cabinet, or
paced the dark halls in deep thought. His sleepless
vigilance so struck his subjects that the strangest
legends became current even in his life-time: his enemies
whispered that he was no mere man, but an evil
spirit that required no rest. One grotesque tale even
said that the Emperor had been seen long after midnight
traversing the corridors of his palace&mdash;without
his head.
</p>

<p>
If Justinian seemed hardly human to those who
<pb n='070'/><anchor id='Pg070'/>
feared him, Theodora is represented as entirely given
up to pride and ambition, never forgiving an offence,
but hunting to death or exile all who had crossed her
in the smallest thing. She is reproached&mdash;but who that
has risen from a low estate is not?&mdash;of an inordinate
love for the pomps and vanities of imperial state.
High officials complained that she had as great a
voice in settling political matters as her husband.
Yet, on the whole, her influence would appear not to
have been an evil one&mdash;historians acknowledge that
she was liberal in almsgiving, religious after her own
fashion, and that she often interfered to aid the
oppressed. It is particularly recorded that, remembering
the dangers of her own youth, she was zealous
in establishing institutions for the reclaiming of women
who had fallen into sin.
</p>

<p>
The aged Justinus died in 527 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>, and Justinian
became the sole occupant of the throne, which he was
destined to occupy for thirty-eight years. It was less
than half the century, yet his personality seems to pervade
the whole period, and history hardly remembers
the insignificant predecessors and successors whose
reigns eke out the remainder of the years between 500
and 600.
</p>

<p>
The empire when Justinian took it over from the
hands of his uncle was in a more prosperous condition
than it had known since the death of Constantine.
Since the Ostrogoths had moved out of the Balkan
Peninsula in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 487, it had not suffered from any very
long or destructive invasion from without. The Slavonic
tribes, now heard of for the first time, and the
Bulgarians had made raids across the Danube, but
<pb n='071'/><anchor id='Pg071'/>
they had not yet shown any signs of settling down&mdash;as
the Goths had done&mdash;within the limits of the
empire. Their incursions, though vexatious, were not
dangerous. Still the European provinces of the
empire were in worse condition than the Asiatic, and
were far from having recovered the effects of the
ravages of Fritigern and Alaric, Attila, and Theodoric.
But the more fortunate Asiatic lands had
hardly seen a foreign enemy for centuries.<note place='foot'>There had been only an isolated raids of Huns in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 395, which
penetrated as far as Palestine. No other invasion reached as far as
Antioch.</note> Except
in the immediate neighbourhood of the Persian frontier
there was no danger, and Persian wars had been
infrequent of late. Southern Asia Minor had once or
twice suffered from internal risings&mdash;rebellions of the
warlike Isaurians&mdash;but civil war left no such permanent
mark on the land as did barbarian invasions. On
the whole, the resources of the provinces beyond the
Bosphorus were intact.
</p>

<p>
Justinus in his quiet reign had spent little or none
of the great hoard of treasure which Anastasius had
bequeathed to him. There were more than 300,000 lbs.
of gold [£13,400,000] in store when Justinian came to
the throne. The army, as we have had occasion to
relate in the last chapter, was in good order, and composed
in a larger proportion of born subjects of the
empire than it had been at any time since the battle of
Adrianople. There would appear to have been from
150,000 to 200,000 men under arms, but the extent of
the frontiers of the empire were so great that Justinian
never sent out a single army of more than
<pb n='072'/><anchor id='Pg072'/>
30,000 strong, and forces of only a third of that
number are often found entrusted with such mighty
enterprises as the invasion of Africa or the defence
of the Armenian border. The flower of the Roman
army was no longer its infantry, but its mailed horsemen
(<foreign rend='italic'>Cataphracti</foreign>), armed with lance and bow, as the
Parthian cavalry had once been of old. The infantry
comprised more archers and javelin-men than heavy
troops: the Isaurians and other provincials of the
mountainous parts of Asia Minor were reckoned
the best of them. Among both horse and foot large
bodies of foreign auxiliaries were still found: the
Huns and Arabs supplied light cavalry, the German
Herules and Gepidæ from beyond the Danube heavier
troops.
</p>

<p>
The weakest point in the empire when Justinian
took it over was its financial system. The cardinal
maxim of political economy, that <q>taxes should be
raised in the manner least oppressive to those who
pay them</q> was as yet undreamt of. The exaction
of arbitrary customs dues, and the frequent grant of
monopolies was noxious to trade. The deplorable
system of tax-farming through middlemen was employed
in many branches of the revenue. Landed
proprietors, small and great, were still mercilessly
overtaxed, in consideration of their exemption from
military service. The budget was always handicapped
by the necessity for providing free corn for
the populace of Constantinople. Yet in spite of all
these drawbacks Justinian enjoyed an enormous and
steady revenue. His finance minister, John of Cappadocia,
was such an ingenious extortioner that the
<pb n='073'/><anchor id='Pg073'/>
treasury was never empty in the hardest stress of war
and famine: but it was kept full at the expense of
the future. The grinding taxation of Justinian's
reign bore fruit in the permanent impoverishment
of the provinces: his successors were never able to
raise such a revenue again. Here again Justinian
may well be compared to Louis XIV.
</p>

<p>
Justinian's policy divides into the departments of
internal and foreign affairs. Of his doings as legislator,
administrator, theologian, and builder, we shall
speak in their proper place. But the history of his
foreign policy forms the main interest of his reign.
He had determined to take up a task which none of
his predecessors since the division of the Empire
under Arcadius and Honorius had dared to contemplate.
It was his dream to re-unite under his sceptre
the German kingdoms in the Western Mediterranean
which had been formed out of the broken fragments
of the realm of Honorius; and to end the solemn
pretence by which he was nominally acknowledged as
Emperor West of the Adriatic, while really all power
was in the hands of the German rulers who posed as
his vicegerents. He aimed at reconquering Italy,
Africa, and Spain&mdash;if not the further provinces of the
old empire. We shall see that he went far towards
accomplishing his intention.
</p>

<p>
But during the first five years of his reign his attention
was distracted by other matters. The first of
them was an obstinate war of four years' duration,
with Kobad, King of Persia. The causes of quarrel
were ultimately the rival pretensions of the Roman
and Persian Empires to the suzerainty of the small
<pb n='074'/><anchor id='Pg074'/>
states on their northern frontiers near the Black Sea,
the kingdoms of Lazica and Iberia, and more proximately
the strengthening of the fortresses on the
Mesopotamian border by Justinian. His fortification
of Dara, close to the Persian frontier town of Nisibis,
was the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>casus belli</foreign> chosen by Kobad, who declared
war in 528, a year after Justinian's accession.
</p>

<p>
The Persian war was bloody, but absolutely indecisive.
All the attacks of the enemy were repelled,
and one great pitched battle won over him at Dara in
530. But neither party succeeded in taking a single
fortress of importance from the other; and when, on
the death of Kobad, his son Chosroës made peace
with the empire, the terms amounted to the restoration
of the old frontier. The only importance of the
war was that it enabled Justinian to test his army,
and showed him that he possessed an officer of first-rate
merit in Belisarius, the victor of the battle of
Dara.
</p>

<p>
This famous general was a native of the Thracian
inland; he entered the army very young, and rose
rapidly, till at the age of twenty-three he was already
Governor of Dara, and at twenty-five <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Magister militum</foreign>
of the East.<note place='foot'><q>Born in Germania, a district between Thrace and Illyricum,</q>
says his secretary, Procopius. We do not know where the district&mdash;a
German settlement, presumably&mdash;was situated.</note> His influence at Court was very great,
as he had married Antonina, the favourite and confidante
of the Empress Theodora. His position, indeed,
was not unlike that which Marlborough, owing to his
wife's ascendency, enjoyed at the Court of Queen
Anne. Like Marlborough, too, Belisarius was ruled
<pb n='075'/><anchor id='Pg075'/>
and bullied by his clever and unscrupulous wife.
Unlike the great Duchess Sarah, Antonina never set
herself to thwart her mistress; but after Theodora's
death she and her husband lost favour, and in
declining years knew much the same misfortune as
did the Marlboroughs.
</p>

<p>
The year which saw the Persian War end [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 532],
saw also the rise and fall of another danger, which
while it lasted was much more threatening to the
Emperor's life and power. We have already noticed
the <q>Blues</q> and <q>Greens,</q> the great factions of the
Byzantine Circus.<note place='foot'>See chap. ii. p. <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>.</note> All through the fifth century they
had been growing stronger, and interfered more and
more in politics, and even in religious controversies.
To be a <q>Green</q> in 530 meant to be a partisan of
the house of the late Emperor Anastasius, and a
Monophysite.<note place='foot'>To hold the view which denied the existence both of a truly human
and a truly Divine nature in Our Lord Jesus Christ.</note> The <q>Blues</q> posed as partisans of
the house of Justinus, and as strictly orthodox in
matters ecclesiastical. From mere Circus factions
they had almost grown into political parties; but
they still retained at the bottom many traces of their
low sporting origin. The rougher elements pre-dominated
in them; they were prone to riot and
mischief, and, as the events of 532 were to show, they
were a serious danger to the State.
</p>

<p>
In January of that year there was serious rioting in
the streets. Justinian, though ordinarily he favoured
the Blue faction, impartially ordered the leaders
of the rioters on both sides to be put to death.
<pb n='076'/><anchor id='Pg076'/>
Seven were selected for execution, and four of them
were duly beheaded in the presence of a great and
angry mob, in front of the monastery of St. Conon.
The last three rioters were to be hung, but the hangman
so bungled his task that two of the criminals,
one a Blue the other a Green, fell to the ground alive.
The guards seized them and they were again suspended;
but once more&mdash;owing no doubt to the terror
of the executioners at the menaces of the mob&mdash;the
rope slipped. Then the multitude broke loose,
the guards were swept away, and the half-hung
criminals were thrust into sanctuary at the adjacent
monastery.
</p>

<p>
This exciting incident proved the commencement
of six days of desperate rioting. The Blues and
Greens united, and taking as their watchword, <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Nika</foreign>,
<q>conquer,</q> swept through the city, crying for the deposition
of John of Cappadocia, the unpopular finance
minister, and of Eudemius, Praefect of the city, who
was immediately responsible for the executions. The
ordinary police of the capital were quite unable to
master them, and Justinian was weak enough to promise
to dismiss the officials. But the mob was now
quite out of hand, and refused to disperse: the
trouble was fomented by the partisans of the house of
the late emperor, who began to shout for the deposition
of Justinian, and wished to make Hypatius,
nephew of Anastasius, Cæsar in his stead. The city
was almost empty of troops, owing to the garrison
having been sent to the Persian War. The Emperor
could only count on 4,000 men of the Imperial
Guard, a few German auxiliaries, and a regiment
<pb n='077'/><anchor id='Pg077'/>
of 500 <q>Cataphracti,</q> mailed horsemen, under Belisarius,
who had just returned from the seat of war.
</p>

<p>
Belisarius was placed in command of the whole,
and sallied out to clear the streets, but the rioters,
showing the same pluck that the Byzantine mob displayed
against the soldiers of Gainas a hundred and
twenty-five years before, offered a stout resistance.
The main fighting took place around the great
square of the Augustaeum, between the Imperial
palace and the Hippodrome. In the heat of the
fight the rebels set fire to the Brazen Porch by
the Senate House. The Senate House caught fire,
and then the conflagration spread east and north,
till it was wafted across the square to St. Sophia.
On the third day of the riot the great cathedral
was burnt to the ground, and from thence the flames
issued out to burn the hospital of Sampson and the
church of St. Irene.<note place='foot'>See map on p. <ref target='Pg019'>20</ref>.</note> The fire checked the fighting,
and the insurgents were now in possession of most
of the city. But they could not find their chosen
leader, for the unfortunate Hypatius, who had no
desire to risk his neck, had taken refuge with the
Emperor in the palace. It was not till he was
actually driven out by Justinian, who feared to have
him about his person, that this rebel in spite of
himself, fell into the hands of his own adherents.
But on the sixth day of the riots they led him to the
Hippodrome, installed him in the royal seat of the
Kathisma, and crowned him there with a gold chain
of his wife's, for want of a proper diadem.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/fig-12.png' rend='width: 60%'>
    <head>Theodora Imperatrix.
<hi rend='italic'>From the Painting by Val. Prinsep. The copyright is in the
Artist's hands.</hi></head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile there was dismay and diversity of
<pb n='079'/><anchor id='Pg079'/>
councils in the Palace. John of Cappadocia and
many other ministers strove to persuade the Emperor
to fly by sea, and gather additional troops at Heraclea.
There was nothing left in his power save the
palace, and they insisted that if he remained there
longer he would be surrounded by the rebels and cut
off from escape. It was then that the Empress Theodora
rose to the level of the occasion, refused to fly,
and urged her husband to make one final assault on
the enemy. Her words are preserved by Procopius.
</p>

<p>
<q>This is no occasion to keep to the old rule that a
woman must not speak in the council. Those who
are most concerned have most right to dictate the
course of action. Now every man must die once, and
for a king death is better than dethronement and
exile. May I never see the day when my purple robe
is stripped from me, and when I am no more called
Lady and Mistress! If you wish, O Emperor, to save
your life, nothing is easier: there are your ships and
the sea. But <emph>I</emph> agree with the old saying that
<q>Empire is the best winding-sheet.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
Spurred on by his wife's bold words, Justinian
ordered a last assault on the rebels, and Belisarius led
out his full force. The factions were now in the Hippodrome,
saluting their newly-crowned leader with
shouts of <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Hypatie Auguste, tu vincas,</foreign></q> preparatory
to a final attack on the palace. Belisarius attacked
at once all three gates of the Hippodrome: that
directed against the door of the Kathisma failed, but
the soldiery forced both the side entrances, and after a
hard struggle the rebels were entirely routed. Crowded
into the enormous building with only five exits,
<pb n='080'/><anchor id='Pg080'/>
they fell in thousands by the swords of the victorious
Imperialists. It is said that 35,000 men were slain in
the six days of this great <q>Sedition of Nika.</q>
</p>

<p>
It is curious to learn that not even this awful
slaughter succeeded in crushing the factions. We
hear of the Blues and Greens still rioting on various
occasions during the next fifty years. But they never
came again so near to changing the course of history
as in the famous rising of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 532.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='081'/><anchor id='Pg081'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>VII. Justinian's Foreign Conquests.</head>

<p>
After the Persians had drawn back, foiled in their
attempt to conquer Mesopotamia, and after the suppression
of the <q>Nika</q> sedition had cowed the unruly
populace of Constantinople, Justinian found himself
at last free, and was able to take in hand his great
scheme for the reconquest of the lost provinces of
the empire.
</p>

<p>
The enforced delay of six years between his accession
and his first attempt to execute his great plan,
was, as it happened, extremely favourable to the Emperor.
In each of the two German kingdoms with
which he had first to deal, the power had passed
within those six years into the hands of a weak and
incapable sovereign. In Africa, Hilderic, the king
of the Vandals, had been dethroned by his cousin
Gelimer, a warlike and ambitious, but very incapable,
ruler. In Italy, Theodoric, the great king of the Ostrogoths,
had died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 526, and his grandson and
successor, Athalaric, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 533. After the death of the
young Athalaric, the kingdom fell to his mother,
Amalasuntha, and she, compelled by Gothic public
<pb n='082'/><anchor id='Pg082'/>
opinion to take a husband to rule in her behalf, had
unwisely wedded Theodahat, her nearest kinsman.
He was cruel, scheming, and suspicious, and murdered
his wife, within a year of her having brought
him the kingdom of Italy as a dowry.<note place='foot'>The murder of Amalasuntha took place <emph>after</emph> the Roman invasion
of Africa; but Theodahat was already on the throne when the Vandal
war was proceeding.</note> Cowardly
and avaricious as well as ungrateful, Theodahat possessed
exactly those vices which were most suited to
make him the scorn of his warlike subjects; he could
count neither on their loyalty nor their respect in the
event of a war.
</p>

<p>
Both the Vandals in Africa and the Goths in Italy
were at this time so weak as to invite an attack by
an enterprising neighbour. They had, in fact, conquered
larger realms than their limited numbers were
really able to control. The original tribal hordes
which had subdued Africa and Italy were composed
of fifty or sixty thousand warriors, with their wives
and children. Now such a body concentrated on one
spot was powerful enough to bear down everything
before it. But when the conquerors spread themselves
abroad, they were but a sprinkling among the
millions of provincials whom they had to govern. In
all Italy there were probably but three cities&mdash;Ravenna,
Verona, and Pavia&mdash;in which the Ostrogoths
formed a large proportion of the population. A great
army makes but a small nation, and the Goths and Vandals
were too few to occupy such wide tracts as Italy
and Africa. They formed merely a small aristocracy,
governing by dint of the ascendency which their
<pb n='083'/><anchor id='Pg083'/>
fathers had won over the minds of the unwarlike
populations which they had subdued. The only
chance for the survival of the Ostrogothic and Vandal
monarchies lay in the possibility of their amalgamating
with the Roman provincial population, as
the Franks, under more favourable circumstances,
did with the conquered inhabitants of Gaul. This
was seen by Theodoric, the great conqueror of Italy;
and he did his best to reconcile Goth and Roman,
held the balance with strict justice between the two,
and employed Romans as well as Goths in the government
of the country. But one generation does little
to assuage old hatreds such as that between the conquerors
and the conquered in Italy. Theodoric was
succeeded by a child, and then by a ruffian, and his
work ended with him. Even he was unable to strike
at the most fatal difference of all between his countrymen
and the Italians. The Goths were Arians, having
been converted to Christianity in the fourth century
by missionaries who held the Arian heresy. Their
subjects, on the other hand, were Orthodox Catholics,
almost without exception. When religious hatred
was added to race hatred, there was hardly any hope
of welding together the two nationalities.
</p>

<p>
Another source of weakness in the kingdoms of
Africa and Italy must be noted. The Vandals of the
third generation and the Goths of the second, after
their settlement in the south, seem to have degenerated
in courage and stamina. It may be that the climate
was unfavourable to races reared in the Danube lands;
it may be that the temptations of unlimited luxury
offered by Roman civilization sufficed to demoralize
<pb n='084'/><anchor id='Pg084'/>
them. A Gothic sage observed at the time that <q>the
Goth, when rich, tends to become Roman in his
habits; the Roman, when poor, Gothic in his.</q>
There was truth in this saying, and the result of the
change was ominous for the permanence of the kingdom
of Italy. If the masters softened and the subjects
hardened, they would not preserve for ever their
respective positions.
</p>

<p>
The case of the kingdom of Africa was infinitely
worse than that of the kingdom of Italy. The Vandals
were less numerous than the Goths, in proportion
to their subjects; they were not merely heretics, but
fanatical and persecuting heretics, which the Goths
were not. Moreover, they had never had at their
head a great organizer and administrator like Theodoric,
but only a succession of turbulent princes of
the Viking type, fit for war and nothing else.
</p>

<p>
Justinian declared war on King Gelimer the moment
that he had made peace with Persia, using as
his <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>casus belli</foreign>, not a definite re-assertion of the claim
of the empire over Africa&mdash;for such language would
have provoked the rulers of Italy and Spain to join
the Vandals, but the fact that Gelimer had wrongfully
deposed Hilderic, the Emperor's ally. In July,
533, Belisarius, who was now at the height of his
favour for his successful suppression of the <q>Nika</q>
rioters, sailed from the Bosphorus with an army of
10,000 foot and 5,000 horse. He was accompanied,
luckily for history, by his secretary, Procopius, a very
capable writer, who has left a full account of his
master's campaigns. Belisarius landed at Tripoli, at the
extreme eastern limit of the Vandal power. The town
<pb n='085'/><anchor id='Pg085'/>
was at once betrayed to him by its Roman inhabitants.
From thence he advanced cautiously along the coast,
meeting with no opposition; for the incapable Gelimer
had been caught unprepared, and was still engaged
in calling in his scattered warriors. It was not
till he had approached within ten miles of Carthage
that Belisarius was attacked by the Vandals. After
a hard struggle he defeated them, and the city fell
into his hands next clay. The provincials were delighted
at the rout of their masters, and welcomed
the imperial army with joy; there was neither riot
nor pillage, and Carthage had not the aspect of a
conquered town.
</p>

<p>
Calling up his last reserves, Gelimer made one more
attempt to try the fortunes of war. He advanced on
Carthage, and was met by Belisarius at Tricameron,
on the road to Bulla. Again the day went against
him; his army broke up, his last fortresses threw
open their gates, and there was an end of the Vandal
kingdom. It had existed just 104 years, since
Genseric entered Africa in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 429.
</p>

<p>
Gelimer took refuge for a time with the Moorish
tribes who dwelt in the fastnesses of Mount Atlas.
But ere long he resolved to surrender himself to
Belisarius, whose humanity was as well known as his
courage. He sent to Carthage to say that he was
about to give himself up, and&mdash;so the story goes&mdash;asked
but for three things: a harp, to which to
chant a dirge he had written on the fate of himself
and the Vandal race; a sponge, to wipe away his
tears; and a loaf, a delicacy he had not tasted ever
since he had been forced to partake of the unsavoury
<pb n='086'/><anchor id='Pg086'/>
food of the Moors! Belisarius received Gelimer with
kindness, and took him to Constantinople, along with
the treasures of the palace of Carthage, which included
many of the spoils of Rome captured by the
Vandals eighty-six years before, when they sacked
the imperial city, in 453. It is said that among these
spoils were some of the golden vessels of the Temple
at Jerusalem, which Titus had brought in triumph to
Rome, and which Gaiseric had carried from Rome to
Carthage.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/fig-13.png' rend='width: 80%'>
    <head>Cavalry Scouts. (<hi rend='italic'>From a Byzantine MS.</hi>)
<hi rend='italic'>Reproduced from "L'Art Byzantin."  Par Charles Bayet.
Paris, Quantin, 1883.</hi></head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
The triumphal entry of Belisarius into Constantinople
with his captives and his spoils, encouraged
Justinian to order instant preparations for an attack
on the second German kingdom, on his western
frontier. He declared war on the wretched King
Theodahat in the summer of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 435, using as his
pretext the murder of Queen Amalasuntha, whom,
as we have already said, her ungrateful spouse had
<pb n='087'/><anchor id='Pg087'/>
first imprisoned and then strangled within a year of
their marriage.
</p>

<p>
The king of the Goths, whether he was conscience-stricken
or merely cowardly, showed the greatest
terror at the declaration of war. He even wrote to
Constantinople offering to resign his crown, if the
Emperor would guarantee his life and his private
property. Meanwhile he consulted soothsayers and
magicians about his prospects, for he was as superstitious
as he was incompetent. Procopius tells us
a strange tale of the doings of a Jewish magician of
note, to whom Theodahat applied. He took thirty
pigs&mdash;to represent unclean Gentiles, we must suppose&mdash;and
penned them in three styes, ten in each.
The one part he called <q>Goths,</q> the second <q>Italians,</q>
and the third <q>Imperialists.</q> He left the beasts
without food or water for ten days, and bade the king
visit them at the end of that time, and take augury
from their condition. When Theodahat looked in he
found all but two of the <q>Goth</q> pigs dead, and half of
the <q>Italians,</q> but the <q>Imperialists,</q> though gaunt
and wasted, were all, or almost all, alive. This portent
the Jew expounded as meaning that at the end
of the approaching war the Gothic race would be exterminated
and their Italian subjects terribly thinned,
while the Imperial troops would conquer, though with
toil and difficult.
</p>

<p>
While Theodahat was busying himself with portents,
actual war had broken out on the Illyrian
frontier between the Goths and the governor of Dalmatia.
There was no use in making further offers to
Justinian, and the king of Italy had to face the situation
as best he could.
</p>

<pb n='088'/><anchor id='Pg088'/>

<p>
In the summer of 535, Belisarius landed in Sicily,
with an even smaller army than had been given him
to conquer Africa&mdash;only 3,000 Roman troops, all
Isaurians, and 4,500 barbarian auxiliaries of different
sorts. Belisarius' first campaign was as fortunate as
had been that which he had waged against Gelimer.
All the Sicilian towns threw open their gates except
Palermo, where there was a considerable Gothic garrison,
and Palermo fell after a short siege. In six
months the whole island was in the hands of
Belisarius.
</p>

<p>
Theodahat seemed incapable of defending himself;
he fell into a condition of abject helplessness, which
so provoked his warlike subjects, that when the news
came that Belisarius had crossed over into Italy and
taken Rhegium, they rose and slew him. In his stead
the army of the Goths elected as their king Witiges, a
middle-aged warrior, well known for personal courage
and integrity, but quite incompetent to face the impending
storm.
</p>

<p>
After the fall of Rhegium, Belisarius marched
rapidly on Naples, meeting no opposition; for the
Goths were very thinly scattered through Southern
Italy, and had not even enough men to garrison the
Lucanian and Calabrian fortresses. Naples was
taken by surprise, the Imperialists finding their way
within the walls by crawling up a disused aqueduct.
After this important conquest, Belisarius made for
Rome, though his forces were reduced to a mere
handful by the necessity of leaving garrisons in his
late conquests. King Witiges made no effort to obstruct
his approach. He had received news that the Franks
<pb n='089'/><anchor id='Pg089'/>
were threatening an evasion of Northern Italy, and
went north to oppose an imaginary danger in the
Alps, when he should have been defending the line
of the Tiber. Having staved off the danger of a
Frankish war by ceding Provence to King Theuderic,
Witiges turned back, only to learn that Rome was
now in the hands of the enemy. The troops of Leudaris,
the Gothic general, who had been left with
4,000 men to defend the city, had been struck with
panic at the approach of Belisarius, and were cowardly
and idiotic enough to evacuate it without striking a
blow. Five thousand men had sufficed to seize the
ancient capital of the world! [December, 536.]
</p>

<p>
Next spring King Witiges came down with the
main army of the Goths&mdash;more than 100,000 strong&mdash;and
laid siege to Rome. The defence of the town
by Belisarius and his very inadequate garrison forms
the most interesting episode in the Italian war. For
more than a year the Ostrogoths lay before its walls,
essaying every device to force an entry. They tried
open storm; they endeavoured to bribe traitors within
the city; they strove to creep along the bed of a disused
aqueduct, as Belisarius had done a year before
at Naples. All was in vain, though the besiegers
outnumbered the garrison twenty-fold, and exposed
their lives with the same recklessness that their ancestors
had shown in the invasion of the empire a
hundred years back. The scene best remembered in
the siege was the simultaneous assault on five points
in the wall, on the 21st of March, 537. Three of the
attacks were beaten back with ease; but near the
Prænestine Gate, at the south-east of the city, one
<pb n='090'/><anchor id='Pg090'/>
storming party actually forced its way within the walls,
and had to be beaten out by sheer hard fighting; and
at the mausoleum of Hadrian, on the north-west,
another spirited combat took place. Hadrian's tomb&mdash;a
great quadrangular structure of white marble,
300 feet square and 85 feet high&mdash;was surmounted
by one of the most magnificent collections of statuary
in ancient Rome, including four great equestrian
statues of emperors at its corners. The Goths, with
their ladders, swarmed at the foot of the tomb in such
numbers, that the arrows and darts of the defenders
were insufficient to beat them back. Then, as a last
resource, the Imperialists tore down the scores of
statues which adorned the mausoleum, and crushed
the mass of assailants beneath a rain of marble fragments.
Two famous antiques, that form the pride of
modern galleries&mdash;the <q>Dancing Faun</q> at Florence,
and the <q>Barberini Faun</q> at Munich&mdash;were found, a
thousand years later, buried in the ditch of the tomb
of Hadrian, and must have been among the missiles
employed against the Goths. The rough usage which
they then received proved the means of preserving
them for the admiration of the modern world.
</p>

<p>
A year and nine days after he had formed the siege
of Rome, the unlucky Witiges had to abandon it.
His army, reduced by sword and famine, had given
up all hope of success, and news had just arrived that
the Imperialists had launched a new army against
Ravenna, the Gothic capital. Belisarius, indeed, had
just received a reinforcement of 6,000 or 7,000 men,
and had wisely sent a considerable force, under an
officer named John, to fall on the Adriatic coast.
</p>

<pb n='091'/><anchor id='Pg091'/>

<p>
The scene of the war was now transported further
to the north; but its character still remained the same.
The Romans gained territory, the Goths lost it.
Firmly fixed at Ancona and Rimini and Osimo, Belisarius
gradually forced his way nearer to Ravenna,
and, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 540 laid siege to it. Witiges, blockaded
by Belisarius in his capital, made no such skilful
defence as did his rival at Rome three years before.
To add to his troubles, the Franks came down into
Northern Italy, and threatened to conquer the valley
of the Po, the last Gothic stronghold. Witiges then
made proposals for submission; but Belisarius refused
to grant any terms other than unconditional surrender,
though his master Justinian was ready to
acknowledge Witiges as vassal-king in Trans-Padane
Italy. Famine drove Ravenna to open its gates, and
the Goths, enraged at their imbecile king, and struck
with admiration for the courage and generosity of Belisarius,
offered to make their conqueror Emperor of
the West. The loyal general refused; but bade the
Goths disperse each to his home, and dwell peaceably
for the future as subjects of the empire. [May, 540
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>] He himself, taking the great Gothic treasure-hoard
from the palace of Theodoric, and the captive
Witiges, sailed for Constantinople, and laid his
trophies at his master's feet.
</p>

<p>
Italy now seemed even as Africa; only Pavia and
Verona were still held by Gothic garrisons, and when
he sailed home, Belisarius deemed his work so nearly
done, that his lieutenants would suffice to crush out
the last embers of the strife. He himself was required
in the East, for a new Persian war with Chosroësroës,
<pb n='092'/><anchor id='Pg092'/>
son of Kobad, was on the eve of breaking out.
But things were not destined to end so. At the last
moment the Goths found a king and a hero to rescue
them, and the conquest of Italy was destined to be
deferred for twelve years more. Two ephemeral
rulers reigned for a few months at Pavia, and came
to bloody ends; but their successor was Baduila,<note place='foot'>The king's real name was Baduila, as shown on his coins, and
recorded by some historians, but Imperialist writers always call him
Totila, which seems to have been a nickname.</note> the
noblest character of the sixth century&mdash;<q>the first
knight of the Middle Ages,</q> as he has been called.
When the generals of Justinian marched against
him, to finish the war by the capture of Verona and
Pavia, he won over them the first victory that the Goths
had obtained since their enemies landed in Italy. This
was followed by two more successes; the scattered
armies of Witiges rallied round the banner of the
new king, and at once the cities of Central and
Southern Italy began to fall back into Gothic hands,
with the same rapidity with which they had yielded
to Belisarius. The fact was, that the war had been
a cruel strain on the Italians, and that the imperial
governors, and still more their fiscal agents, or <q>logothetes,</q>
had become unbearably oppressive. Italy
had lived through the fit of enthusiasm with which it
had received the armies of Justinian, and was now
regretting the days of Theodoric as a long-lost golden
age. Most of its cities were soon in Baduila's hands;
the Imperialists retained only the districts round Rome,
Naples, Otranto, and Ravenna. Of Naples they were
soon deprived. [<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 543.] Baduila invested it, and
<pb n='093'/><anchor id='Pg093'/>
ere long constrained it to surrender. He treated the
inhabitants with a kindness and consideration which
no Roman general, except Belisarius, had ever displayed.
A speech which he delivered to his generals
soon after this success deserves a record, as showing
the character of the man. A Gothic warrior had
been convicted of violating the daughter of a Roman.
Baduila condemned him to death. His officers came
round him to plead for the soldier's life. He answered
them that they must choose that day whether
they preferred to save one man's life or the life of the
Gothic race. At the beginning of the war, as they
knew well, the Goths had brave soldiers, famous
generals, countless treasure, horses, weapons, and all
the forts of Italy. And yet under Theodahat&mdash;a
man who loved gold better than justice&mdash;they had so
angered God by their unrighteous lives, that all the
troubles of the last ten years had come upon them.
Now God seemed to have avenged Himself on them
enough. He had begun a new course with them, and
they must begin a new course with Him, and justice
was the only path. As for the present criminal being
a valiant hero, let them know that the unjust man
and the ravisher was never brave in fight; but that,
according to a man's life, such was his luck in battle.
</p>

<p>
Such was the justice of Baduila; and it seemed as
if his dream was about to come true, and that the
regenerate Goths would win back all that they had
lost. Ere long he was at the gates of Rome, prepared
to essay, with 15,000 men, what Witiges had failed
to do with 100,000. Lest all his Italian conquests
should be lost, Justinian was obliged to send back
<pb n='094'/><anchor id='Pg094'/>
Belisarius, for no one else could hold back the Goths.
But Belisarius was ill-supplied with men; he had
fallen into disfavour at Court, and the imperial
ministers stinted him of troops and money. Unable
to relieve Rome, he had to wait at Portus, by the
mouth of the Tiber, watching for a chance to enter
the city. That chance he never got. The famine-stricken
Romans, angry with the cruel and avaricious
Bessas, who commanded the garrison, began to long
for the victory of their enemy; and one night some
traitors opened the Asinarian Gate, and let in Baduila
and his Goths. The King thought that his
troubles were over; he assembled his chiefs, and bade
them observe how, in the time of Witiges, 7,000
Greeks had conquered, and robbed of kingdom and
liberty, 100,000 well-armed Goths. But now that
they were few, poor, and wretched, the Goths had
conquered more than 20,000 of the enemy. And
why? Because of old they looked to anything rather
than justice: they had sinned against each other and
the Romans. Therefore they must choose henceforth,
and be just men and have God with them, or
unjust and have God against them.
</p>

<p>
Baduila had determined to do that which no general
since Hannibal had contemplated: he would destroy
Rome, and with it all the traditions of the world-empire
of the ancient city&mdash;to him they seemed but
snares, tending to corrupt the mind of the Goths.
The people he sent away unharmed&mdash;they were but a
few thousand left after the horrors of the famine during
the siege. But he broke down the walls, and dismantled
the palaces and arsenals. For a few weeks
<pb n='095'/><anchor id='Pg095'/>
Rome was a deserted city, given up to the wolf and
the owl [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 550].
</p>

<p>
For eleven unquiet years, Baduila, the brave and
just, ruled Italy, holding his own against Belisarius, till
the great general was called home by some wretched
court intrigue. But presently Justinian gathered
another army, more numerous than any that Belisarius
had led, and sent it to Italy, under the command
of the eunuch Narses. It was a strange choice
that made the chamberlain into a general; but it
succeeded. Narses marched round the head of the
Adriatic, and invaded Italy from the north. Baduila
went forth to meet him at Tagina, in the Apennines.
For a long day the Ostrogothic knights rode
again and again into the Imperialist ranks; but all
their furious charges failed. At evening they reeled
back broken, and their king received a mortal wound
in the flight [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 553].
</p>

<p>
With the death of Baduila, it was all up with the
Goths; their hero's knightly courage and kingly
righteousness had not sufficed to save them from the
same doom which had overtaken the Vandals. The
broken army made one last stand in Campania, under
a chief named Teia; but he was slain in battle at
Nuceria, and then the Goths surrendered. They
told Narses that the hand of God was against them;
they would quit Italy, and go back to dwell in the
north, in the land of their fathers. So the poor
remnant of the conquering Ostrogoths marched off,
crossed the Po and the Alps, and passed away into
oblivion in the northern darkness. The scheme of
Justinian was complete. Italy was his; but an Italy
<pb n='096'/><anchor id='Pg096'/>
so wasted and depopulated, that the traces of the
ancient Roman rule had almost vanished. <q>The
land,</q> says a contemporary chronicler, <q>was reduced
to primeval solitude</q>&mdash;war and famine had swept it
bare.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/fig-14.png' rend='width: 80%'>
    <head>Details Of St. Sophia.</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
It is strange to find that the Emperor was not tired
out by waging this desperate war with the Goths;
the moment it ended he began to essay another
western conquest. There was civil war in Spain,
and, taking advantage of it, Liberius, governor of
Africa, landed in Andalusia, and rapidly took the
great towns of the south of the peninsula&mdash;Cordova,
<pb n='097'/><anchor id='Pg097'/>
Cartagena, Malaga, and Cadiz. The factious Visigoths
then dropped their strife, united in arms under
King Athangild, and checked the further progress of
the imperial arms. But a long slip of the lost territory
was not recovered by them. Justinian and his
successors, down to <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 623, reigned over the greater
part of the sea-coast of Southern Spain.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='098'/><anchor id='Pg098'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>VIII. The End Of Justinian's Reign.</head>

<p>
The slackness with which the generals of Justinian
prosecuted the Gothic war in the period between the
triumph of Belisarius at Ravenna in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 540, and
the final conquest of Italy in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 553, is mainly to
be explained by the fact that, just at the moment of
the fall of Ravenna, the empire became involved in
a new struggle with its great Eastern neighbour.
Chosroës of Persia was seriously alarmed at the
African and Italian conquests of Justinian, and
remembered that he too, as well as the Vandals and
Goths, was in possession of provinces that had
formerly been Roman, and might one day be reclaimed
by the Emperor. He determined to strike
before Justinian had got free from his Italian war,
and while the flower of the Roman army was still in
the West. Using as his pretext for war some petty
quarrels between two tribes of Arabs, subject respectively
to Persia and the empire, he declared war
in the spring of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 540. Justinian, as the king
had hoped, was caught unprepared: the army of the
Euphrates was so weak that it never dared face the
<pb n='099'/><anchor id='Pg099'/>
Persians in the field, and the opening of the war was
fraught with such a disaster to the empire as had
not been known since the battle of Adrianople, more
than a hundred and sixty years before. Avoiding
the fortresses of Mesopotamia, Chosroës, who led his
army in person, burst into Northern Syria. His
main object was to strike a blow at Antioch, the
metropolis of the East, a rich city that had not seen
an enemy for nearly three centuries, and was
reckoned safe from all attacks owing to its distance
from the frontier. Antioch had a strong garrison of
6,000 men and the <q>Blues</q> and <q>Greens</q> of its
circus factions had taken arms to support the regular
troops. But the commander was incompetent, and
the fortifications had been somewhat neglected of
late. After a sharp struggle, Chosroës took the town
by assault; the garrison cut its way out, and many of
the inhabitants escaped with it, but the city was
sacked from cellar to garret and thousands of
captives were dragged away by the Persians.
Chosroës planted them by the Euphrates&mdash;as
Nebuchadnezzar had done of old with the Jews&mdash;and
built for them a city which he called Chosroantiocheia,
blending his own name with that of their
ancient abode.
</p>

<p>
This horrible disaster to the second city of the
Roman East roused all Justinian's energy; neglecting
the Italian war, he sent all his disposable troops
to the Euphrates frontier, and named Belisarius
himself as the chief commander. After this, Chosroës
won no such successes as had distinguished his first
campaign. Having commenced an attack on the
<pb n='100'/><anchor id='Pg100'/>
Roman border fortresses in Colchis, far to the north,
he was drawn home by the news that Belisarius had
invaded Assyria and was besieging Nisibis. On the
approach of the king the imperial general retired,
but his manœuvre had cost the Persian the fruits of
a whole summer's preparation, and the year <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 541
ended without serious fighting. In the next spring
very similar operations followed: Belisarius defended
the line of the Euphrates with success, and the
invaders retired after having reduced one single
Mesopotamian fortress. The war lingered for two
years more, till Chosroës, disgusted at the ill-success
of all his efforts since his first success at Antioch,
and more especially humiliated by a bloody repulse
from the walls of Edessa, consented to treat for
peace [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 545]. He gave up his conquests&mdash;which
were of small importance&mdash;but regarded the honours
of the war as being his own, because Justinian
consented to pay him 2,000 lbs. of gold [£108,000]
on the ratification of the treaty. One curious clause
was inserted in the document&mdash;though hostilities
ceased everywhere else, the rights of the two
monarchs to the suzerainty of the kingdom of
Lazica, on the Colchian frontier, hard by the Black
Sea, were left undefined. For no less than seven
years a sort of by-war was maintained in this small
district, while peace prevailed on all other points of
the Perso-Roman frontier. It was not till <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 556,
after both parties had wasted much treasure and
many men on the unprofitable contest, that Chosroës
resigned the attempt to hold the small and rugged
mountain kingdom of the Lazi, and resigned it to
<pb n='101'/><anchor id='Pg101'/>
Justinian on the promise of an annual grant of
£18,000 as compensation money.
</p>

<p>
But although Justinian had brought his second
Persian war to a not unsuccessful end, the empire
had come badly out of the struggle, and was by
556 falling into a condition of incipient disorder and
decay. This was partly caused by the reckless
financial expedients of the Emperor, who taxed the
provinces with unexampled rigour while forced to
maintain at once a Persian and an Italian war.
</p>

<p>
The main part of the damage, however, was
wrought by other than human means. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 542
there broke out in the empire a plague such as had
not been known for three hundred years&mdash;the last
similar visitation had fallen in the reign of Trebonianus
Gallus, far back in the third century. This
pestilence was one of the epoch-making events in
the history of the empire, as great a landmark as the
Black Death in the history of England. The details
which Procopius gives us concerning its progress and
results leave no doubt that it operated more powerfully
than any other factor in that weakening of the
empire which is noticeable in the second half of the
sixth century. When it reached Constantinople,
5,000 persons a day are said to have fallen victims
to it. All customary occupations ceased in the city,
and the market-place was empty save for corpse-bearers.
In many houses not a single soul remained
alive, and the government had to take special
measures for the burial of neglected corpses. <q>The
disease,</q> says the chronicler, <q>did not attack any
particular race or class of men, nor prevail in any
<pb n='102'/><anchor id='Pg102'/>
particular region, nor confine itself to any period of
the year. Summer or winter, North or South, Greek
or Arabian, washed or unwashed&mdash;of such distinctions
the plague took no account. A man might climb to
the hill-top, and it was there; he might retire to the
depths of a cavern, and it was there also.</q> The
only marked characteristic of its ravages that the
chronicler could find was that, <q>whether by chance
or providential design, it strictly spared the most
wicked.</q><note place='foot'>Bury's <q>Later Roman Empire,</q> i. 402.</note>
</p>

<p>
Justinian himself fell ill of the plague: he recovered,
but was never his old self again. Though
he persevered inflexibly to his last day in his scheme
for the reconquest of the empire, yet he seems to
have declined in energy, and more especially to have
lost that power of organization, which had been his
most marked characteristic. The chroniclers complain
that he had grown less hopeful and less
masterful. <q>After achieving so much in the days
of his vigour, when he entered into the last stage
of his life he seemed to weary of his labours, and
preferred to create discord among his foes or to
mollify them with gifts, instead of trusting to his
arms and facing the dangers of war. So he allowed
his troops to decline in numbers, because he did not
expect to require their services. And his ministers,
who collected his taxes and maintained his armies
were affected with the same indifference.</q><note place='foot'>Agathias.</note>
</p>

<p>
One feature of the Emperor's later years was that
he took more and more interest in theological
<pb n='103'/><anchor id='Pg103'/>
disputes, even to the neglect of State business. The
Church question of the day was the dispute on
Monophysitism, the heresy which denied the existence
both of a human and a divine nature in Our Lord.
Justinian was not a monophysite himself, but wished
to unify the sect with the main body of the Church
by edicts of comprehension, which forbade the
discussion of the subject, and spent much trouble
in coercing prelates orthodox and heretical into a
reconciliation which had no chance of permanent
success. His chief difficulty was with the bishops
of Rome. He forced Pope Vigilius to come to
Constantinople, and kept him under constraint for
many months, till he signed all that was required of
him [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 554]. The only result was to win Vigilius
the reputation of a heretic, and to cause a growing
estrangement between East and West.
</p>

<p>
The gloom of Justinian's later years was even more
marked after the death of his wife; Theodora died
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 548, six years after the great plague, and it
may be that her loss was no less a cause of the
diminished energy of his later years than was his
enfeebled health. Her bold and adventurous spirit
must have buoyed him up in many of the more
difficult enterprises of the first half of his reign.
After her death, Justinian seems to have trusted no
one: his destined successor, Justinus, son of his
sister, was kept in the background, and no great
minister seems to have possessed his confidence.
Even Belisarius, the first and most loyal soldier of
the empire, does not appear to have been trusted: in
the second Gothic war the Emperor stinted him of
<pb n='104'/><anchor id='Pg104'/>
troops and hampered him with colleagues. At last
he was recalled [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 549] and sent into private life,
from which he was only recalled on the occurrence
of a sudden military crisis in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 558.
</p>

<p>
This crisis was a striking example of the mismanagement
of Justinian's later years. A nomad
horde from the South Russian steppes, the Cotrigur
Huns, had crossed the frozen Danube at mid-winter,
when hostilities were least expected, and thrown
themselves on the Thracian provinces. The empire
had 150,000 men under arms at the moment, but
they were all dispersed abroad, many in Italy, others
in Africa, others in Spain, others in Colchis, some in
the Thebaid, and a few on the Mesopotamian frontier.
There was such a dearth of men to defend the home
provinces that the barbarians rode unhindered over
the whole country side from the Danube to the
Propontis plundering and burning. One body, only
7,000 strong, came up to within a few miles of the
city gates, and inspired such fear that the Constantinopolitans
began to send their money and
church-plate over to Asia. Justinian then summoned
Belisarius from his retirement, and placed him in
command of what troops there were available&mdash;a
single regiment of 300 veterans from Italy, and
the <q>Scholarian guards,</q> a body of local troops
3,500 strong, raised in the city and entrusted with
the charge of its gates, which inspired little confidence
as its members were allowed to practice their
trades and avocations and only called out in rotation
for occasional service. With this undisciplined force,
which had never seen war, at his back, Belisarius
<pb n='105'/><anchor id='Pg105'/>
contrived to beat off the Huns. He led them to
pursue him back to a carefully prepared position,
where the only point that could be attacked was
covered with woods and hedges on either side. The
untrustworthy <q>Scholarians</q> were placed on the
flanks, where they could not be seriously molested,
while the 300 Italian veterans covered the one
vulnerable point. The Huns attacked, were shot
down from the woods and beaten off in front, and
fled leaving 400 men on the field, while the Romans
only lost a few wounded and not a single soldier
slain. Thus the last military exploit of Belisarius
preserved the suburbs of the imperial city itself from
molestation; after defending Old Rome in his prime,
he saved New Rome in his old age.
</p>

<p>
Even this last service did not prevent Justinian
from viewing his great servant with suspicion. Four
years later an obscure conspiracy against his life was
discovered, and one of the conspirators named Belisarius
as being privy to the plot. The old emperor
affected to believe the accusation, sequestrated the
general's property, and kept him under surveillance
for eight months. Belisarius was then acquitted and
restored to favour: he lived two years longer, and
died in March, 565.<note place='foot'>It is comforting to know that the popular legend which tells how
the great general lived in poverty and disgrace, begging the passer-by
<q>dare obolum Belisario,</q> and dying in the streets, is untrue. But
the suspicious emperor's conduct was quite unpardonable.</note> The ungrateful master whom
he had served so well followed him to the grave nine
months later.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Of Justinian as conqueror and governor we have
<pb n='106'/><anchor id='Pg106'/>
said much. But there remain two more aspects of
his life which deserve notice&mdash;his work as a builder
and his codification of the laws. From the days of
Diocletian the style of architecture which we call
Byzantine, for want of a better name, had been
slowly developing from the old classic forms, and
many of the emperors of the fourth and fifth centuries
had been given to building. But no previous
monarch had combined in such a degree as did
Justinian the will and the power to launch out into
architectural experiments. He had at his disposal
the hoarded treasures of Anastasius, and his tastes
were as magnificent as those of the great builders of
the early empire, Augustus and Nero and Hadrian.
All over the empire the monuments of his wealth and
taste were seen in dozens of churches, halls of justice,
monasteries, forts, hospitals, and colonnades. The
historian Procopius was able to compose a considerable
volume entirely on the subject of Justinian's buildings,
and numbers of them survive, some perfect and more
in ruins, to witness to the accuracy of the work. Even
in the more secluded or outlying portions of the
empire, any fine building that is found is, in two cases
out of three, one of the works of Justinian. Not merely
great centres like Constantinople or Jerusalem, but
out-of-the-way tracts in Cappadocia and Isauria, are
full of his buildings. Even in the newly-conquered
Ravenna his great churches of San Vitale, containing
the celebrated mosaic portraits of himself and his
wife, and of St. Apollinare in the suburb of Classis,
outshine the older works of the fifth-century emperors
and of the Goth Theodoric.
</p>

<pb n='107'/><anchor id='Pg107'/>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/fig-15.png' rend='width: 80%'>
    <head>Columns In St. Sophia.</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/fig-16.png' rend='width: 60%'>
    <head>Galleries Of St. Sophia.</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Justinian's churches, indeed, are the best known of
his buildings. In Oriental church-architecture his
reign forms a landmark: up to his time Christian
architects had still been using two patterns copied
straight from Old Roman models. The first was the
round domed church, whose origin can be traced back to
such Roman originals as the celebrated Temple of
Vesta&mdash;of such the Church of the Holy Sepulchre at
Rome may serve as a type. The second was the
rectangular church with apses, which was nothing
more than an adaptation for ecclesiastical purposes
of the Old Roman law-courts, and which had borrowed
from them its name of <foreign rend='italic'>Basilica</foreign>. St. Paul's
Outside the Walls, at Rome is a fair specimen. Justinian
brought into use for the first time on a large
scale the combination of a cruciform ground-plan and
a very large dome. The famous Church of St. Sophia
may serve as the type of this style. The great
cathedral of Constantinople had already been burnt
down twice, as we have had occasion to relate: the
first time on the eve of the banishment of John
Chrysostom, the second in the great <q>Nika</q> riot of
532. Within forty days of its destruction Justinian
had commenced preparations for rebuilding it as a
monument of his triumph in the civil strife. He
chose as his architect Anthemius of Tralles, the
greatest of Byzantine builders, and one of the few
whose names have survived. The third church was
different in plan from either of its predecessors, showing
the new combination which we have already
specified. It is a Greek cross, 241 feet long and 224
broad, having in its midst a vast dome, pierced by no
<pb n='109'/><anchor id='Pg109'/>
less than forty windows, light and airy and soaring
180 feet above the floor. In the nave the aisles and
side apses are parted from the main central spaces by
magnificent colonnades of marble pillars, the majority
of <foreign rend='italic'>verde antique</foreign>. These are not for the most part the
work of Justinian's day, but were plundered from the
chief pagan temples of Asia, which served as an
inexhaustible quarry for the Christian builder. The
whole of the interior, both roof and dome, was
covered with gilding or mosaics, which the Vandalism
of the Turks has covered with a coat of
whitewash, to hide the representations of human
forms which are offensive to the Moslems' creed.
Procopius describes the church with enthusiasm, and
his praises are well justified&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<q>It presents a most glorious spectacle, extraordinary
to those who behold it, and altogether incredible
to those who know it by report only. In height it
rises to the very heavens, and overtops the neighbouring
buildings like a ship anchored among them. It
towers above the city which it adorns, and from it
the whole of Constantinople can be beheld, as from a
watch-tower. Its breadth and length are so judiciously
chosen, that it appears both broad and long
without disproportion. For it excels both in size
and harmony, being more magnificent than ordinary
buildings, and much more elegant than the few which
approach it in size. Within it is singularly full of
light and sunshine; you would declare that the place
is not lighted from without, but that the rays are
produced within itself, such an abundance of light is
<pb n='111'/><anchor id='Pg111'/>
poured into it. The gilded ceiling adds glory to its
interior, though the light reflected upon the gold from
the marble surpasses it in beauty. Who can tell of
the splendour of the columns and marbles with which
the church is adorned? One would think that one
had come upon a meadow full of flowers in bloom&mdash;one
wonders at the purple tints of some, the green of
others, the glowing red and glittering white, and
those, too, which nature, like a painter, has marked
with the strongest contrasts of colour. Moreover, it
is impossible accurately to describe the treasures of
gold and silver plate and gems which the Emperor
has presented to the church: the Sanctuary alone
contains forty thousand pounds weight of silver.</q>
</quote>

<p>
Justinian was almost as great a builder of forts as
of churches, but his military works have for the most
part disappeared. It may give some idea of his
energy in fortifying the frontiers when we state that
the Illyrian provinces alone were protected by 294
forts, of which Procopius gives a list, disposed in four
successive lines from the Danube back to the Thessalian
hills. Some were single towers, but many were
elaborate fortresses with outworks, and all had to be
protected by garrisons.
</p>

<p>
Thus much of Justinian as builder: space fails to
enumerate a tithe of his works. Of his great legal
achievement we must speak at even shorter length.
The Roman law, as he received it from his predecessors
was an enormous mass of precedents and
decisions, in which the original basis was overlaid
with the various and sometimes contradictory rescripts
<pb n='112'/><anchor id='Pg112'/>
of five centuries of emperors. Several of his
predecessors, and most especially Theodosius II., had
endeavoured to codify the chaotic mass and reduce it
to order. But no one of them had produced a code
which sufficed to bring the law of the day into full
accord with the spirit of the times. It was no mean
work to bring the ancient legislation of Rome, from
the days of the Twelve Tables down to the days of
Justinian, into strict and logical connection with the
new Christian ideas which had worked their way into
predominance since the days of Constantine. Much
of the old law was hopelessly obsolete, owing to the
change in moral ideas which Christianity had introduced,
but it is still astonishing to see how much of
the old forms of the times of the early empire
survived into the sixth century. Justinian employed
a commission, headed by the clever but unpopular
lawyer Tribonian, to draw up his new code. The
work was done for ever and a day, and his <q>Institutes</q>
and <q>Pandects</q> were the last revision of the
Old Roman laws, and the starting-point of all
systematic legal study in Europe, when, six hundred
years later, the need for something more than customary
folk-right began to make itself felt, as mediæval
civilization evolved itself out of the chaos of the
dark ages. If the Roman Empire had flourished in
the century after Justinian as in that which preceded
him, other revisers of the laws might have produced
compilations that would have made the <q>Institutes</q>
seem out of date. But, as a matter of fact, decay
and chaos followed after Justinian, and succeeding
emperors had neither the need nor the inclination
<pb n='113'/><anchor id='Pg113'/>
to do his work over again. Hence it came to pass
that his name is for ever associated with the last
great revision of Roman law, and that he himself
went down to posterity as the greatest of legislators,
destined to be enthroned by Dante in one
of the starry thrones of his <q>Paradise,</q> and to be
worshipped as the father of law by all the legists of
the Renaissance.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='114'/><anchor id='Pg114'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>IX. The Coming Of The Slavs.</head>

<p>
The thirty years which followed the death of
Justinian are covered by three reigns, those of
Justinus II. [565-578], Tiberius Constantinus [578-582],
and Maurice [582-602]. These three emperors
were men of much the same character as the predecessors
of Justinian; each of them was an experienced
official of mature age, who was selected by the reigning
emperor as his most worthy successor. Justinus
was the favourite nephew of Justinian, and had served
him for many years as Curopalates, or Master of the
Palace. Tiberius Constantinus was <q>Count of the
Excubiti,</q> a high Court officer in the suite of Justinus:
Maurice again served Tiberius as <q>Count of the
Fœderati,</q> or chief of the Barbarian auxiliaries. They
were all men of capacity, and strove to do their best
for the empire: historians concur in praising the
justice of Justinus, the liberality and humanity of
Tiberius, the piety of Maurice. Yet under them the
empire was steadily going down hill: the exhausting
effects of the reign of Justinian were making themselves
felt more and more, and at the end of the reign
<pb n='115'/><anchor id='Pg115'/>
of Maurice a time of chaos and disaster was impending,
which came to a head under his successor.
</p>

<p>
The internal causes of the disaster of this time were
the weakening of the empire by the great plague of
544 and still more by the grinding exactions of
Justinian's financial system. Its external phenomena
were invasions by new hordes from the north, combined
with long and exhausting wars with Persia.
The virtues of the emperors seem to have helped
them little: Justin's justice made him feared rather
than loved; Tiberius's liberality rendered him popular,
but drained the treasury; Maurice, on the other hand,
who was economical and endeavoured to fill the
coffers which his predecessors had emptied, was therefore
universally condemned as avaricious.
</p>

<p>
The troubles on the frontier which vexed the last
thirty years of the sixth century were due to three
separate sets of enemies&mdash;the Lombards in Italy, the
Slavs and Avars in the Balkan Peninsula, and the
Persians in the East.
</p>

<p>
The empire held undisputed possession of Italy for
no more than fifteen years after the expulsion of the
Ostrogoths in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 553. Then a new enemy came in
from the north, following the same path that had
already served for the Visigoths of Alaric and the
Ostrogoths of Theodoric. The new-comers were the
race of the Lombards, who had hitherto dwelt in
Hungary, on the Middle Danube, and had more frequently
been found as friends than as foes of the
Romans. But their warlike and ambitious King
Alboin, having subdued all his nearer neighbours,
began to covet the fertile plains of Italy, where
<pb n='116'/><anchor id='Pg116'/>
he saw the emperors keeping a very inadequate
garrison, now that the Ostrogoths were finally
driven away. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 568 Alboin and his hordes
crossed the Alps, bringing with them wife and child,
and flocks and herds, while their old land on
the Danube was abandoned to the Avars. The
Lombards took possession of the flat country in
the north of Italy, as far as the line of the Po, with
very little difficulty. The region, we are told, was almost
uninhabited owing to the combined effects of the great
plague and the Ostrogothic war. In this once fertile
and populous, but now deserted, lowland, the Lombards
settled down in great numbers. There they have
left their name as the permanent denomination of the
plain of Lombardy. Only one city, the strong fortress
of Pavia, held out against them for long; when it fell
in 571, after a gallant defence of three years, Alboin
made it his capital, instead of choosing one of the
larger and more famous towns of Milan and Verona,
the older centres of life in the land he had conquered.
After subduing Lombardy the king pushed forward
into Etruria, and overran the valley of the Arno.
But in the midst of his wars he was cut off, if the
legend tells us the truth, by the vengeance of his
wife Queen Rosamund. She was the daughter of
Cunimund, King of the Gepidæ, whom Alboin had
slain in battle. The fallen monarch's skull was, by
the victor's orders, mounted in gold and fashioned into
a cup. Long years after, amid the revelry of a drinking
bout, Alboin had the ghastly cup filled with wine,
and bade his wife bear it around to his chosen
warriors. The queen obeyed, but vowed to revenge
<pb n='117'/><anchor id='Pg117'/>
herself by her husband's death. By the sacrifice of her
honour she bribed Alboin's armour-bearer to slay his
master in his bed, and then fled with him to Constantinople
[<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 573].
</p>

<p>
But the death of Alboin did not put an end to the
Lombard conquests in Italy. The kingdom, indeed,
broke up for a time into several independent duchies,
but the Lombard chiefs continued to win territory from
the empire. Two of them founded the considerable
duchies of Spoleto and Benevento, the one in Central,
and the other in Southern Italy. These states survived
as independent powers, but the rest of the
Lombard territories were reunited by King Autharis,
in 584, and he and his immediate successors completed
the conquest of Northern Italy.
</p>

<p>
Thus, during the reigns of Justin, Tiberius II., and
Maurice, the greater part of Justinian's Italian conquests
were lost, and formed once more into Teutonic
states. The emperor retained only two large stretches
of territory, the one in Central Italy, where he held a
broad belt of land, extending right across the peninsula,
from Ravenna and Ancona on the Adriatic, to
Rome on the Tyrrhenian Sea; the other comprehending
the extreme south of the land&mdash;the <q>toe</q> and
<q>heel</q> of the Italian boot&mdash;and comprising the
territory of Bruttium and the Calabrian<note place='foot'>Calabria is here used in its old sense, meaning South Apulia, and
not the extreme point of Italy down by Reggio and Squillace.</note> towns of
Taranto, Brindisi, and Otranto. Sardinia and Sicily
were also left untouched by the Lombards, who never
succeeded in building a fleet. The Roman territory
which stretched across Central Italy cut the Lombards
<pb n='118'/><anchor id='Pg118'/>
in two, the king ruling the main body of them in
Tuscany and the valley of the Po; while the dukes
of Spoleto and Benevento maintained an isolated
existence in the south.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/fig-17.png' rend='width: 60%'>
    <head>Cross Of Justinus II. (<hi rend='italic'>From the Vatican.</hi>)
(<hi rend='italic'>From "L'Art Byzantin," Par C. Bayet. Paris, Quantin, 1883.</hi>)</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<pb n='119'/><anchor id='Pg119'/>

<p>
This partition of Italy between the Lombards and
the empire is worth remembering, from the fact
that never again, till our own day, was the whole
peninsula gathered into a single state. Not till 1870,
when the kingdom of United Italy was completed by
the conquest of Rome, did a time come when all the
lands between the Alps and the Straits of Messina
were governed by one ruler. Justinian had no successor
till Victor Emmanuel.
</p>

<p>
After the Lombard conquest the imperial dominions
in Italy were administered by a governor, called the
Exarch, who dwelt at Ravenna, the northernmost and
strongest of the imperial fortresses. All the Italian
provinces were nominally beneath his control, but, as
a matter of fact, he was only treated with implicit
obedience by those of his subordinates who dwelt in
his own neighbourhood. He found it harder to
enforce his orders at Naples and Reggio, or in the
distant islands of Sicily and Sardinia. But it was the
bishops of Rome who profited most by his absence:
although a <q>duke,</q> a military officer of some importance,
dwelt at Rome, he was from the first overshadowed
by his spiritual neighbour. Even during the
days of the Ostrogoths the Roman bishops had acquired
considerable importance, as being the chief official
representatives of the Italians in dealings with their
Teutonic masters. But they spoke with much more
freedom and weight when they had to do, not with a
King of Italy dwelling quite near them, but with a mere
governor fettered by orders from distant Constantinople.
Gregory the Great [590-604] was the first of
the popes who began to assume an independent attitude
<pb n='120'/><anchor id='Pg120'/>
and to treat the Exarch at Ravenna with scant
ceremony. He was an able and energetic man, who
could not bear to see Rome suffering for want of a
ruler on the spot, and readily took upon himself civil
functions, in spite of the protests of his nominal
superior the Exarch. In 592, for example, he made
a private truce for Rome with the Lombard Duke of
Spoleto, though the latter was at war with the empire.
The Emperor Maurice stormed at him as foolish and
disobedient, but did not venture to depose him, being
too much troubled with Persian and Avaric wars to
send troops against Rome. On another occasion
Gregory nominated a governor for Naples, instead of
leaving the appointment to the Exarch. In 599 he
acted as mediator between the Lombard king and the
government at Ravenna, as if he had been a neutral
and independent sovereign. Although he showed no
wish to sever his connection with the Roman Empire,
Gregory behaved as if he considered the emperor his
suzerain rather than his immediate ruler. He would
never give in on disputed points, issued orders which
contradicted imperial rescripts, and maintained a
bitter quarrel with successive patriarchs of Constantinople,
who possessed the favour of Maurice. When
the patriarch John the Faster took the title of <q>œcumenical
bishop,</q> Gregory wrote to Maurice to tell him
that the presumption of John was a sure sign that the
days of Antichrist were at hand, and to urge him to
repress such pretensions by the force of the civil arm.
This is one of the first signs of the approach of that
mediæval view of the papacy which imagined that
it was the pontiff's duty to censure and advise kings
<pb n='121'/><anchor id='Pg121'/>
and emperors on all possible topics and occasions.
Gregory's immediate successors were not men of
mark, or a breach with the empire might have been
precipitated. The final disavowal of the supremacy
of the Constantinopolitan monarch was to be still
delayed for nearly two hundred years.
</p>

<p>
The wars between the Exarchs of Ravenna and the
Lombard kings were little influenced by interference
from the East. The emperors during the last thirty
years of the sixth century were far more engrossed
with their Persian and Slavonic wars. Contests with
the Great king of the East occupied no less than
twenty years in the reigns of Justin II., Tiberius, and
Maurice. War was declared in 572, and did not cease
till 592. Like the struggle between Justinian and
Chosroës I., thirty years before, it was wholly
indecisive. There were more plundering raids than
battles, and the frontier provinces of each empire
were reduced to a dreadful state of desolation and
depopulation: if the Persians pushed their ravages as
far as the gates of Antioch, Roman generals penetrated
deep into Media and Corduene, where the
imperial banner had not been seen for two hundred
years. The net result of the whole twenty years of
strife was that each combatant had seriously weakened
and distressed his rival, without obtaining any definite
superiority over him. Forced to make peace by the
pressure of a civil war, Chosroës II. gave back to
Maurice the two frontier cities of Dara and Martyropolis,
the sole trophies of twenty campaigns, and
ceded him a slice of Armenian territory. But these
trivial gains were far from compensating the empire
<pb n='122'/><anchor id='Pg122'/>
for the fearful losses caused by dozens of Persian
invasions.
</p>

<p>
The Persian war was exhausting, but successful: on
the northern frontier, however, the Roman army had
been faring far worse, and serious losses of territory
were beginning to take place. The enemies in this
quarter were two new tribes, who appeared on the
Danube after the Lombards had departed from it to
commence their invasion of Italy. There were now
no Teutons left on the northern frontier of the empire:
of the incoming tribes, one was Tartar and the other
Slavonic. The Avars were a nomadic race from Asia,
wild horsemen of the Steppes, much like their predecessors
the Huns. They had fled west to escape
the Turks, who were at this time building up an
empire in Central Asia, and betook themselves to the
South Russian plains, not far from the mouth of the
Danube. To cross the river and ravage Moesia was
too tempting a prospect to be neglected, and ere long
the Avaric cavalry were seen only too frequently along
the Balkans and on the coast of the Black Sea. Their
first raid into Roman territory fell into the year 562,
just before the death of Justinian, and from that time
forward they were always causing trouble. They were
ready enough to make peace when money was paid
them, but as they invariably broke the agreement
when the money was spent, it was never long before
they reappeared south of the Danube.
</p>

<p>
But the Slavs were a far more serious danger to
the empire than the Avars. The latter came only to
plunder, the former&mdash;like the Germans two centuries
before&mdash;came pressing into the provinces to win themselves
<pb n='123'/><anchor id='Pg123'/>
a new home. The Romans knew at first of
only two tribes of them, the Slovenes and Antae, but
behind these there were others who were gradually to
push their way to the south and make their presence
known&mdash;Croats, Servians, and many more. The Slavs
were the easternmost of the Aryan peoples of Europe,
and by far the most backward. They had always lain
behind the Germans, and it was only when the
German barrier was removed by the migration of the
Goths and Lombards that they came into touch
with the empire. They were rude races, far behind
the Teutons in civilization; they had hardly learnt
as yet the simplest arts, knew nothing of defensive
armour, and could only use for boats tree-trunks
hollowed out by fire&mdash;like the Australian savages of
to-day. They had not learnt to live under kings or
chiefs, but dwelt in village communities, governed by
the patriarchs of the several families. Their abodes
were mud huts, and they cultivated no grain but
millet. When they went to war they could send out
thousands of spearmen and bowmen, but their wild
bands were not very formidable in the open field.
They could resist neither cavalry nor disciplined
infantry, and were only formidable in woods and defiles,
where they formed ambuscades and endeavoured
to take their enemy by surprise, and overwhelm him
by a sudden rush. We are assured that one of their
favourite devices was to conceal themselves in ponds
or rivers by lying down in the water for hours together,
breathing through reeds, whose points were the only
things visible above the surface. Thus a thousand
men might be concealed, and nothing appear except
<pb n='124'/><anchor id='Pg124'/>
a bed of rushes. This strange stratagem would seem
incredible, if we had not on record one or two occasions
on which it was actually practised.
</p>

<p>
The Slavs had begun to make themselves felt early
in the sixth century, but it was not till the death of
Justinian that we hear of them as a pressing danger.
But when the Lombards had passed away westward,
they came down to the Danube and began to cross it
in great numbers, in the endeavour to make permanent
settlements on the Roman bank. The raids of the
Slavs and the Avars were curiously complicated, for
the king, or Chagan, of the Tartar tribe had made
vassals of many of his Slavonic neighbours. They, on
the other hand, sometimes acted in obedience to him,
but more frequently tried to escape from his power by
pushing forward into Roman territory. Hence it
comes that we often find Slav and Avar leagued
together, but at other times find them acting
separately, or even in opposition to each other. A
more chaotic series of campaigns it is hard to conceive.
</p>

<p>
Down to this time the inland of the Balkan peninsula
had been inhabited by Thracian and Illyrian
provincials, of whom the majority spoke the Latin
tongue, though a few still preserved their ancient
barbaric idiom.<note place='foot'>From them the Albanians descend: the Albanian tongue is the only
relic of ancient Illyria.</note> They formed the only large body of
subjects of the empire outside Italy, who still spoke
the old ruling language, and as they were about a
quarter of its population, they did much to preserve its
Roman character, and to prevent it from becoming
<pb n='125'/><anchor id='Pg125'/>
Greek or Asiatic. Their pride in their Latin tongue
was very marked: Justinian, born in the heart of the
district, was fond of laying special stress on the fact
that Latin was his native language.
</p>

<p>
On this Latinized Thraco-Illyrian population the
invasion of the Slavs and Avars fell with unexampled
severity. The Goths had afflicted them
before, but they, at least, had been Christian
and semi-civilized, while the new-comers were in
the lowest grade of savagery. It is not too much
to say that between 570 and 600 the old population
was almost exterminated over the greater part
of the country north of the Balkans&mdash;the modern
Servia and Bulgaria&mdash;and very sadly cut down even
in the more sheltered Macedonian and Thracian provinces.
The Latin-speaking provincials almost disappeared:
the only remnants of them were the
Dalmatian islanders and the <q>Vlachs</q> or Wallachians
who are found in later times scattered in
small bodies among the Slavs who had swept over
the whole country-side. The effect of the invasion
is well described by the contemporary chronicler,
John of Ephesus&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q>The year 581 was famous for the invasion of the
accursed people called Slavonians, who overran Greece
and the country by Thessalonica, and all Thrace, and
captured the cities and took many forts, and devastated
and burnt, and reduced the people to slavery,
and made themselves masters of the whole country,
and settled in it, by main force, and dwelt in it as
though it had been their own. Four years have now
elapsed, and still they live at their ease in the land,
<pb n='126'/><anchor id='Pg126'/>
and spread themselves far and wide, as far as God
permits them, and ravage and burn and take captive,
and still they encamp and dwell there.</q>
</p>

<p>
The open country was swept bare by the Slavs: the
towns resisted better, for neither Slav nor Avar was
skilled in siege operations. Relying upon the fortified
towns as his base the great general Priscus, whom
Maurice placed in command, was able to keep his
ground along the Danube, and to perform many
gallant exploits. He even crossed the river and
attacked the Slavs and Avars in their own homes
beyond it; but it was to no effect that he burnt their
villages and slew off their warriors. He could not
protect the unarmed population in the open country
within the Roman boundary, and the girdle of
fortresses along the Danube soon covered nothing
but a wasted region, sparsely inhabited by Slavs.
The limit of Roman population had fallen back to
the line of the Balkans, and even to the south of it,
and the Slavs were ever slipping across the Danube
in larger and larger numbers, despite the garrisons
along the river which were still kept up from Singidunum
[Belgrade] to Dorostolum [Silistria].
</p>

<p>
The misfortunes of the Avaric and Slavonic war were
the cause of the fall of the Emperor Maurice. He had
won some unpopularity by his manifest inability to
stem the tide of the barbarian invasion, and more by
an act of callousness, of which he was guilty in 599.
The Chagan of the Avars had captured 15,000
prisoners, and offered to release them for a large
ransom. Maurice&mdash;whose treasury was empty&mdash;refused
to comply, and the Chagan massacred the
<pb n='127'/><anchor id='Pg127'/>
wretched captives. But the immediate cause of the
emperor's fall was his way of dealing with the army.
He was unpopular with the soldiery, though an old
soldier himself, and did not possess their respect or
confidence. Yet he was an officer of some merit
and had written a long military treatise called the
<q>Strategicon,</q> which was the official handbook of the
imperial armies for three hundred years.
</p>

<p>
Maurice sealed his fate when, in 602, he issued
orders for the discontented army of the Danube to
winter north of the river, in the waste marshes of the
Slavs. The troops refused to obey the order, and
chased away their generals. Then electing as their
captain an obscure centurion, named Phocas, they
marched on Constantinople.
</p>

<p>
Maurice armed the city factions, the <q>Blues</q> and
<q>Greens,</q> and strove to defend himself. But when he
saw that no one would fight for him, he fled across the
Bosphorus with his wife and children, to seek refuge
in the Asiatic provinces, where he was less unpopular
than in Europe. Soon he was pursued by orders of
Phocas, whom the army had now saluted as emperor,
and caught at Chalcedon. The cruel usurper had him
executed along with all his five sons, the youngest a
child of only three years of age. Maurice died with
a courage and piety that moved even his enemies,
exclaiming with his last breath, <q>Thou art just, O
Lord, and just are thy judgments!</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='128'/><anchor id='Pg128'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>X. The Darkest Hour.</head>

<p>
For the first time since Constantinople had become
the seat of empire the throne had been won by armed
rebellion and the murder of the legitimate ruler.
The break in the peaceful and orderly succession
which had hitherto prevailed was not only an evil
precedent, but an immediate disaster. The new
emperor proved a far worse governor than the unfortunate
Maurice, who, in spite of his faults and his
ill luck, had always been hard-working, moderate,
pious, and economical. Phocas was a mere brutal
soldier&mdash;cruel, ignorant, suspicious, and reckless, and
in his incapable hands the empire began to fall to
pieces with alarming rapidity. He opened his reign
with a series of cruel executions of his predecessor's
friends, and from that moment his deeds of bloodshed
never ceased: probably the worst of them was the
execution of Constantina, widow of Maurice and
daughter of Tiberius II., whom he slew together with
her three young daughters, lest their names might be
used as the excuse for a conspiracy against him. But
even greater horror seems to have been caused when
<pb n='129'/><anchor id='Pg129'/>
he burnt alive the able general Narses,<note place='foot'>To be carefully distinguished from his homonym in Justinian's time.</note> who had won
many laurels in the last Persian war. Narses had
come up to the capital under safe conduct to clear
himself from accusations of treason: so the Emperor
not only devised a punishment which had never yet
been heard of since the empire became Christian, but
broke his own plighted oath.
</p>

<p>
The moment that Phocas had mounted the throne,
Chosroës of Persia declared war on him, using the
hypocritical pretext that he wished to revenge
Maurice, for whom he professed a warm personal
friendship. This war was far different from the
indecisive contests in the reigns of Justinian and
Justin II. In two successive years the Persians burst
into North Syria and ravaged it as far as the sea;
but in the third they turned north and swept over the
hitherto untouched provinces of Asia Minor. In 608
their main army penetrated across Cappadocia and
Galatia right up to the gates of Chalcedon. The
inhabitants of Constantinople could see the blazing
villages across the water on the Asiatic shore&mdash;a sight
as new as it was terrifying; for although Thrace had
several times been harried to within sight of the
city, no enemy had ever been seen in Bithynia.
</p>

<p>
Plot after plot was formed in the capital against
Phocas, but he succeeded in putting them all down,
and slew the conspirators with fearful tortures. For
eight years his reign continued: Constantinople was
full of executions; Asia was ravaged from sea to
sea; the Thracian and Illyrian provinces were overrun
more and more by the Slavs, now that the army
<pb n='130'/><anchor id='Pg130'/>
of Europe had been transferred across the Bosphorus
to make head against the Persians. Yet Phocas still
held on to Constantinople: the creature of a military
revolt himself, it was by a military revolt alone that
he was destined to be overthrown.
</p>

<p>
Africa was the only portion of the Roman Empire
which in the reign of Phocas was suffering neither
from civil strife nor foreign invasion. It was well
governed by the aged exarch Heraclius, who was so
well liked in the province that the emperor had not
dared to depose him. Urged by desperate entreaties
from all parties in Constantinople to strike a blow
against the tyrant, and deliver the empire from the
yoke of a monster, Heraclius at last consented. He
quietly got ready a fleet, which he placed under the
orders of his son, who bore the same name as himself.
This he despatched against Constantinople, while at
the same time his nephew Nicetas led a large body of
horse along the African shore to invade Egypt.
</p>

<p>
When Heraclius the younger arrived with his fleet
at the Dardanelles, all the prominent citizens of Constantinople
fled secretly to take refuge with him. As
he neared the capital the troops of Phocas burst into
mutiny: the tyrant's fleet was scattered after a slight
engagement, and the city threw open its gates.
Phocas was seized in the palace by an official whom
he had cruelly wronged, and brought aboard the
galley of the conqueror. <q>Is it thus,</q> said Heraclius,
<q>that you have governed the empire?</q> <q>Will you
govern it any better?</q> sneered the desperate usurper.
Heraclius spurned him away with his foot, and the
sailors hewed him to pieces on the deck.
</p>

<pb n='131'/><anchor id='Pg131'/>

<p>
Next day the patriarch and the senate hailed
Heraclius as emperor, and he was duly crowned in
St. Sophia on October 5, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 610.
</p>

<p>
Heraclius took over the empire in such a state of
disorder and confusion that he must soon have felt
that there was some truth in the dying sneer of
Phocas. It seemed almost impossible to get things
into better order, for resources were wanting. Save
Africa and Egypt and the district immediately around
the capital, all the provinces were overrun by the
Persian, the Avar, and the Slav. The treasury
was empty, and the army had almost disappeared
owing to repeated and bloody defeats in Asia Minor.
</p>

<p>
Heraclius seems at first to have almost despaired
of the possibility of evolving order out of this chaos,
though he was in the prime of life and strength&mdash;<q>a
man of middle stature, strongly built, and broad-chested,
with grey eyes and yellow hair, and of a very
fair complexion; he wore a bushy beard when he
came to the throne, but afterwards cut it short.</q>
For the first twelve years of his reign he remained
at Constantinople, endeavouring to reorganize the
empire, and to defend at any rate the frontiers of
Thrace and Asia Minor. The more distant provinces
he hardly seems to have hoped to save, and the
chronicle of his early years is filled with the catalogue
of the losses of the empire. Mesopotamia and North
Syria had already been lost by Phocas, but in 613,
while the imperial armies were endeavouring to defend
Cappadocia, the Persian general Shahrbarz turned
southwards and attacked Central Syria. The great
town of Damascus fell into his hands; but worse
<pb n='132'/><anchor id='Pg132'/>
was to come. In 614 the Persian army appeared
before the holy city of Jerusalem, took it after a short
resistance, and occupied it with a garrison. But the
populace rose and slaughtered the Persian troops
when Shahrbarz had departed with his main army.
This brought him back in wrath: he stormed the
city and put 90,000 Christians to the sword, only
sparing the Jewish inhabitants. Zacharias, Patriarch
of Jerusalem, was carried into captivity, and with
him went what all Christians then regarded as the
most precious thing in the world&mdash;the wood of the
<q>True Cross.</q> Helena, the mother of Constantine,
had dug the relic up, according to the well-known
legend, on Mount Moriah, and built for it a splendid
shrine. Now Shahrbarz desecrated the church and
took off the <q>True Cross</q> to Persia.
</p>

<p>
This loss brought the inhabitants of the East
almost to despair; they thought that the luck of the
empire had departed with the Holy Wood, which had
served as its Palladium, and even imagined that the
Last Day was at hand and that Chosroës of Persia
was Antichrist. The mad language of pride and
insult which the Persian in the day of his triumph
used to Heraclius might also explain their belief. His
blasphemous phrases seem like an echo of the letter
of Sennacherib in the Second Book of Kings. The
epistle ran:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q>Chosroës, greatest of gods, and master of the
whole earth, to Heraclius, his vile and insensate
slave. Have I not destroyed the Greeks? You say
you trust in your God: why, then, has he not
delivered out of my hand Caesarea, Jerusalem, and
<pb n='133'/><anchor id='Pg133'/>
Alexandria? Shall I not also destroy Constantinople?
But I will pardon all your sins if you will
come to me with your wife and children; I will give
you lands, vines, and olive groves, and will look upon
you with a kindly aspect. Do not deceive yourself
with the vain hope in that Christ, who was not even
able to save himself from the Jews, who slew him
by nailing him to a cross.</q>
</p>

<p>
The horror and rage roused by the loss of the
<q>True Cross</q> and the blasphemies of King Chosroës
brought about the first real outburst of national
feeling that we meet in the history of the Eastern
Empire. It was felt that the fate of Christendom
hung in the balance, and that all, from highest
to lowest, were bound to make one great effort to
beat back the fire-worshipping Persians from Palestine,
and recover the Holy Places. The Emperor
vowed that he would take the field at the head of the
army&mdash;a thing most unprecedented, for since the
death of Theodosius I., in 395, no Caesar had ever
gone out in person to war. The Church came
forward in the most noble way&mdash;at the instance of
the Patriarch Sergius all the churches of Constantinople
sent their treasures and ornaments to the
mint to be coined down, and serve as a great loan to
the state, which was to be repaid when the Persians
should have been conquered. The free dole of corn
which the inhabitants of the capital had been receiving
ever since the days of Constantine was abolished,
and the populace bore the privation without demur.
It was indeed observed that this measure not only
saved the treasury, but drove into the army&mdash;where
<pb n='134'/><anchor id='Pg134'/>
they were useful&mdash;thousands of the able-bodied
loiterers who were the strength of the circus factions
and the pest of the city. If the dole had been continued
Heraclius could not have found a penny for
the war. Egypt, the granary of the empire, had been
lost in 616, and the supply of government corn
entirely cut off, so that the dole would have had to
be provided by the treasury buying corn, a ruinously
expensive task.
</p>

<p>
By the aid of the Church loan Heraclius equipped
a new army and strengthened his fleet. He also provided
for the garrisoning of Constantinople by an adequate
force, a most necessary precaution, for in 617 the
Persians had again forced their way to the Bosphorus,
and this time captured Chalcedon. Heraclius would
probably have taken the field next year but for
troubles with the Avars. That wild race had long
been working their wicked will on the almost undefended
Thracian provinces, but now they promised
peace. Heraclius went out, at the Chagan's pressing
invitation, to meet him near Heraclea. But the conference
was a snare, for the treacherous savage had
planted ambushes on the way to secure the person
of the Emperor, and Heraclius only escaped by the
speed of his horse. He cast off his imperial mantle
to ride the faster, and galloped into the capital just
in time to close its gates as the vanguard of the
Chagan's army came in sight. The Avars kept the
Emperor engaged for some time, and it was not till
622 that he was able to take the field against the
Persians.
</p>

<p>
This expedition of Heraclius was in spirit the first
<pb n='135'/><anchor id='Pg135'/>
of the Crusades. It was the first war that the Roman
Empire had ever undertaken in a spirit of religious
enthusiasm, for it was to no mere political end that
the Emperor and his people looked forward. The
army marched out to save Christendom, to conquer the
Holy Places, and to recover the <q>True Cross.</q> The
men were wrought up to a high pitch of enthusiasm
by warlike sermons, and the Emperor carried with
him, to stimulate his zeal, a holy picture&mdash;one of those
<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>eikons</foreign> in which the Greek Church has always delighted&mdash;which
was believed to be the work of no mortal
hands.
</p>

<p>
Heraclius made no less than six campaigns (<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
622-27) in his gallant and successful attempt to
save the half-ruined empire. He won great and well-deserved
fame, and his name would be reckoned
among the foremost of the world's warrior-kings if it
had not been for the misfortunes which afterwards
fell on him in his old age.
</p>

<p>
His first campaign cleared Asia Minor of the
Persian hosts, not by a direct attack, but by skilful
strategy. Instead of attacking the army at Chalcedon,
he took ship and landed in Cilicia, in the rear of the
enemy, threatening in this position both Syria and
Cappadocia. As he expected, the Persians broke up
from their camp opposite Constantinople, and came
back to fall upon him. But after much manœuvring
he completely beat the general Shahrbarz, and cleared
Asia Minor of the enemy.
</p>

<p>
In his next campaigns Heraclius endeavoured to
liberate the rest of the Roman Empire by a similar
plan: he resolved to assail Chosroës at home, and
<pb n='136'/><anchor id='Pg136'/>
force him to recall the armies he kept in Syria and
Egypt to defend his own Persian provinces. In
623-4 the Emperor advanced across the Armenian
mountains and threw himself into Media, where his
army revenged the woes of Antioch and Jerusalem
by burning the fire-temples of Ganzaca&mdash;the Median
capital&mdash;and Thebarmes, the birthplace of the Persian
prophet Zoroaster. Chosroës, as might have been
expected, recalled his troops from the west, and
fought two desperate battles to cover Ctesiphon. His
generals were defeated in both, but the Roman army
suffered severely. Winter was at hand, and Heraclius
fell back on Armenia. In his next campaign he
recovered Roman Mesopotamia, with its fortresses of
Amida, Dara, and Martyropolis, and again defeated
the general Shahrbarz.
</p>

<p>
But 626 was the decisive year of the war. The
obstinate Chosroës determined on one final effort to
crush Heraclius, by concerting a joint plan of operations
with the Chagan of the Avars. While the main
Persian army watched the emperor in Armenia, a
great body under Shahrbarz slipped south of him
into Asia Minor and marched on the Bosphorus. At
the same moment the Chagan of the Avars, with
the whole force of his tribe and of his Slavonic
dependants, burst over the Balkans and beset Constantinople
on the European side. The two barbarian
hosts could see each other across the water, and even
contrived to exchange messages, but the Roman fleet
sailing incessantly up and down the strait kept them
from joining forces.
</p>

<p>
In the June, July, and August of 626 the capital
<pb n='137'/><anchor id='Pg137'/>
was thus beset: the danger appeared imminent, and
the Emperor was far away on the Euphrates. But
the garrison was strong, the patrician Bonus, its commander,
was an able officer, the fleet was efficient,
and the same crusading fervour which had inspired
the Constantinopolitans in 622 still buoyed up their
spirits. In the end of July 80,000 Avars and Slavs,
with all sorts of siege implements, delivered simultaneous
assaults along the land front of the city, but
they were beaten back with great slaughter. Next the
Chagan built himself rafts and tried to bring the
Persians across, but the Roman galleys sunk the
clumsy structures, and slew thousands of the Slavs
who had come off in small boats to attack the fleet.
Then the Chagan gave up the siege in disgust and
retired across the Danube.
</p>

<p>
Heraclius had shown great confidence in the strength
of Constantinople and the courage of its defenders.
He sent a few veteran troops to aid the garrison, but
did not slacken from his attack on Persia. While
Shahrbarz and the Chagan were besieging his capital,
he himself was wasting Media and Mesopotamia.
He imitated King Chosroës in calling in Tartar allies
from the north, and revenged the ravages of the
Avars in Thrace by turning 40,000 Khazar horsemen
loose on Northern Persia. The enemy gave way
before him everywhere, and the Persians began to
grow desperate.
</p>

<p>
Next year King Chosroës put into the field the
last levy of Persia, under a general named Rhazates,
whom he bid to go out and <q>conquer or die.</q> At
the same time he wrote to command Shahrbarz to
<pb n='138'/><anchor id='Pg138'/>
evacuate Chalcedon and return home in haste. But
Heraclius intercepted the despatch of recall, and
Shahrbarz came not.
</p>

<p>
Near Nineveh Heraclius fell in with the Persian
home army and inflicted on it a decisive defeat. He
himself, charging at the head of his cavalry, rode
down the general of the enemy and slew him with his
lance. Chosroës could put no new army in the field,
and by Christmas Heraclius had seized his palace of
Dastagerd, and divided among his troops such a
plunder as had never been seen since Alexander the
Great captured Susa.
</p>

<p>
The Nemesis of Chosroës' insane vanity had now
arrived. Ten years after he had written his vaunting
letter to Heraclius he found himself in far worse
plight than his adversary had ever been. After
Dastagerd had fallen he retired to Ctesiphon, the
capital of his empire, but even from thence he had to
flee on the approach of the enemy. Then the end
came: his own son Siroes and his chief nobles seized
him and threw him in chains, and a few days after he
died&mdash;of rage and despair according to one story,
of starvation if the darker tale is true.
</p>

<p>
The new king sent the humblest messages to the
victorious Roman, hailing him as his <q>father,</q> and
apologizing for all the woes that the ambition of
Chosroës had brought upon the world. Heraclius
received his ambassadors with kindness, and granted
peace, on the condition that every inch of Roman territory
should be evacuated, all Roman captives freed,
a war indemnity paid, and the spoils of Jerusalem,
including the <q>True Cross,</q> faithfully restored.
<pb n='139'/><anchor id='Pg139'/>
Siroes consented with alacrity, and in March, 628,
a glorious peace ended the twenty-six years of the
Persian war.
</p>

<p>
Heraclius returned to Constantinople in the summer
of the same year with his spoils, his victorious army,
and his great trophy, the <q>Holy Wood.</q> His entry
was celebrated in the style of an old Roman triumph,
and the Senate conferred on him the title of the
<q>New Scipio.</q> The whole of the citizens, bearing
myrtle boughs, came out to meet the army, and the
ceremony concluded with the exhibition of the <q>True
Cross</q> before the high altar of St. Sophia. Heraclius
afterwards took it back in great pomp to Jerusalem.
</p>

<p>
This was, perhaps, the greatest triumph that any
emperor ever won. Heraclius had surpassed the
eastern achievements of Trajan and Severus, and led
his troops further east than any Roman general had
ever penetrated. His task, too, had been the hardest
ever imposed on an emperor; none of his predecessors
had ever started to war with his very capital beleaguered
and with three-fourths of his provinces in the
hands of the enemy. Since Julius Caesar no one had
fought so incessantly&mdash;for six years the emperor had
not been out of the saddle&mdash;nor met with such
uniform success.
</p>

<p>
Heraclius returned to Constantinople to spend, as
he hoped, the rest of his years in peace. He had now
reached the age of fifty-four, and was much worn by
his incessant campaigning. But the quiet for which
he yearned was to be denied him, and the end of his
reign was to be almost as disastrous as the commencement.
</p>

<pb n='140'/><anchor id='Pg140'/>

<p>
The great Saracen invasion was at hand, and it
was at the very moment of Heraclius' triumph that
Mahomet sent out his famous circular letter to
the kings of the earth, inviting them to embrace
Islam. If the Emperor could but have known that
his desolated realm, spoiled for ten long years by the
Persian and the Avar, and drained of men and money,
was to be invaded by a new enemy far more terrible
than the old, he would have prayed that the day
of his triumph might also be the day of his death.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='141'/><anchor id='Pg141'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>XI. Social And Religious Life.
(<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 320-620.)</head>

<p>
The reign of Heraclius forms the best dividing
point in the history of the empire between what may
roughly be called Ancient History and the Middle
Ages. There is no break at all between Constantine
and Heraclius, though the area, character, social life,
and religion of the empire had been greatly modified
in the three hundred years that separated them. The
new order of things, which commenced when Constantine
established his capital on the Bosphorus, had
a peaceable and orderly development. The first
prominent fact that strikes the eye in the history of
the three centuries is that the sceptre passed from
sovereign to sovereign in quiet and undisturbed
devolution. From the death of Valens onward there
is no instance of a military usurper breaking the line
of succession till the crowning of Phocas in 602. The
emperors were either designated by their predecessors
or&mdash;less frequently&mdash;chosen by the high officials and
the senate. The regularity of their sequence is all
<pb n='142'/><anchor id='Pg142'/>
the more astonishing when we realize that only
in three cases in the whole period was father
succeeded by son. Saving Constantine himself,
Theodosius I., and Arcadius, not a single emperor
left male issue; yet the hereditary instinct had
grown so strong in the empire that nephews, sons-in-law,
and brothers-in-law of sovereigns were gladly
received as their legitimate heirs. Considering this
tendency, it is extraordinary to note that the whole
three hundred years did not produce a single unmitigated
tyrant. Constantius II. was gloomy and
sometimes cruel, Valens was stupid and avaricious,
Arcadius utterly weak and inept, Justinian hard and
thankless; but the general average of the emperors
were men of respectable ability, and in moral
character they will compare favourably with any list
of sovereigns of similar length that any country can
produce.
</p>

<p>
The chief modifications which must be marked in
the character of the empire between 320 and 620
depend on two processes of gradual change which
were going on throughout the three centuries. The
first was the gradual de-Romanization (if we may
coin the uncouth word) alike of the governing classes
and the masses of population. In the fourth century
the Roman impress was still strong in the East; the
Latin language was habitually spoken by every
educated man, and nearly all the machinery of the
administration was worked in Latin phraseology.
All law terms are habitually Latin, all titles of
officers, all names of taxes and institutions. Writers
born and bred in Greece or Asia still wrote in Latin
<pb n='143'/><anchor id='Pg143'/>
as often as in the Greek which must have been more
familiar to them. Ammianus Marcellinus may serve
as a fair example: born in Greece, he wrote in the
tongue of the ruling race rather than in his own
idiom. Moreover there was still in the lands east of
the Adriatic a very large body of Latin-speaking
population&mdash;comprising all the inhabitants of the inland
of the Balkan peninsula, for, except Greece
proper, Macedonia, and a scattered line of cities along
the Thracian coast, the whole land had learnt to
speak the tongue of its conquerors.
</p>

<p>
By the seventh century this Roman element was
rapidly vanishing. It is true that the Emperor was still
hailed as the <q>Pius, Felix, Perpetuus, Augustus</q>:
it was not till about <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 800 that he dropped the
old style and called himself <q>Ἐν Χριστῷ πιστὸς
βασιλεὺς τῶν Ῥωμαίων.</q> Nor were the old Roman
official titles yet disused: men were still tribunes and
patricians, counts and praetors, but little more than
the names survived. Already in the sixth century
a knowledge of Latin was growing unusual even
among educated men. The author Johannes Lydus
tells us that he owed his rise in the civil service
mainly to this rare accomplishment. Procopius, the
best writer of the day and a man of real merit and
discernment, was absolutely ignorant of the rudiments
of Latin, and blunders when he tries to translate the
simplest phrase. Justinian was the last emperor who
spoke Latin as his mother tongue, all his successors
were better skilled in Greek.
</p>

<p>
The gradual disuse of Latin has its origin in the
practical&mdash;though not formal&mdash;solution of the continuity
<pb n='144'/><anchor id='Pg144'/>
between Rome and the East, which began
with the division of the empire between the sons
of Constantine and became more complete after
Odoacer made himself King of Italy in 476. In the
course of a century and a half the Latin element in
the East, cut off from the Latin-speaking West, was
bound to yield before the predominant Greek. But
the process would have been slower if the Eastern
provinces which spoke Latin had not been those
which suffered most from the barbarians. The Visigoths
and Ostrogoths harassed and decimated the
Thracians, Illyrians, and Moesians, but the Slavs a
century later almost exterminated them. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 400
probably a quarter of the provincials east of the
Adriatic spoke Latin; in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 620 not a tenth. The
Romanized lands of the Balkan peninsula had now
become Slavonic principalities: only the Dalmatian
seaports and a few scattered survivors in the Balkans
still used the old tongue. The only districts where
a considerable Latin-speaking population obeyed the
Emperor were Africa and the Italian Exarchate, now
reunited to Constantinople by the conquests of
Justinian. But they seem to have been too remote
from the centre of life and government to have
exercised any influence or delayed the de-Romanizing
of the East. The last notable author, who being a
subject of the empire wrote in Latin as his native
tongue, was the poet Flavius Corippus who addressed
a long panegyric to Justinus II.: as might have been
expected, he was an African.
</p>

<p>
While the empire was losing its Roman characteristics,
it was at the same time growing more and more
<pb n='145'/><anchor id='Pg145'/>
Christian at heart. Under Constantine and his immediate
successors the machinery of government was
only just beginning to be effected by the change of the
emperor's religion. Though the sovereign personally
was Christian, the system remained what it had been
before. Many of the high officials were still pagans,
and the form and spirit of all administrative and legal
business was unaltered from what it had been in the
third century. It is not till forty years after Constantine's
death that we find the Christian spirit fully penetrating
out of the spiritual into the material sphere of
life. Attempts by the State to suppress moral sin no
less than legal crime begin with Theodosius I., whose
crusade against sexual immorality would have been
incomprehensible to even the best of the pagan
emperors. The old gladiatorial shows, one of the
most characteristic and repulsive features of Roman
life, were abolished not long after. They survived
for sixty years at Rome, though Christian Constantinople
never knew them. But this was not the
work of the State, but of a single individual. One
day in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 404 the games had begun, and the gladiators
were about to engage, when the monk Telemachus
leapt down into the arena and threw himself
between the combatants, adjuring them not to slay
their brethren. There was an angry scuffle, and the
good monk was slain. But his death had the effect
that his protests might have failed to bring about,
and no gladiatorial show was ever given again.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/fig-18.png' rend='width: 80%'>
    <head>General View Of St. Sophia.
(<hi rend='italic'>From "L'Art Byzantin." Par C. Bayet. Paris, Quantin, 1883.</hi>)</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
In other provinces of social life the work of
Christianity was no less marked. It put an end to
the detestable practice of infanticide which pervaded
<pb n='147'/><anchor id='Pg147'/>
the ancient world, resting on the assumption that the
father had the right to decide whether or not he would
rear the child he had begotten. Constantine made
the State assume the charge of feeding and rearing
the children of the destitute, lest their parents should
be tempted to cast them forth to perish in the old
fashion, and Valentinian I. in 374 assimilated infanticide
to other forms of murder, and made it a capital
offence.
</p>

<p>
Slavery was also profoundly affected by the
teaching of the Church. The ancient world, save a
few philosophers, had regarded the slave with such
contempt that he was hardly reckoned a moral being
or conceived to have rights or virtues. Christianity
taught that he was a man with an immortal soul, no
less than his own master, and bade slaves and
freemen meet on terms of perfect equality around
the baptismal font and before the sacred table. It
was from the first taught that the man who manumitted
his slaves earned the approval of heaven, and
all occasions of rejoicing, public and private, were fitly
commemorated by the liberation of deserving individuals.
Though slavery was not extinguished for
centuries, its evils were immensely modified;
Justinian's legislation shows that by his time public
opinion had condemned the characteristic evils of
ancient slavery: he permitted the intermarriage of
slaves and free persons, stipulating only for the
consent of the owner of the servile partner in the
wedlock. He declared the children of such mixed
marriages free, and he made the prostitution of a
slave by a master a criminal offence. Hereditary
<pb n='148'/><anchor id='Pg148'/>
slavery became almost unknown, and the institution
was only kept up by the introduction of barbarian
captives, heathens and enemies, whose position did
not appeal so keenly to the mind of their captors.
</p>

<p>
The improvement of the condition of all the
unhappy classes of which we have been speaking&mdash;women,
infants, slaves, gladiators&mdash;can be directly
traced back to a single fundamental Christian truth.
It was the belief in the importance of the individual
human soul in the eyes of God that led the converted
Roman to realize his responsibility, and change his
attitude towards the helpless beings whom he had
before despised and neglected. It is only fair to add
that the realization of this central truth did not
always operate for good in the Roman world of the
fifth and sixth centuries. Some of the developments
of the new idea were harmful and even dangerous to
the State. They took the form of laying such
exclusive stress on the relations between the individual
soul and heaven, that the duties of man to
the State were half forgotten. Chief among these
developments was the ascetic monasticism which,
starting from Egypt, spread rapidly all over the
empire, more especially over its eastern provinces.
When men retire from their duties as citizens, intent
on nothing but on saving their own souls, take up a
position outside the State, and cease to be of the
slightest use to society, the result may be harmless so
long as their numbers are small. But at this time the
monastic impulse was working on such a large scale
that its development was positively dangerous. It
was by thousands and ten thousands that the men
<pb n='149'/><anchor id='Pg149'/>
who ought to have been bearing the burdens of the
State, stepped aside into the monastery or the
hermit's cave. The ascetics of the fifth century had
neither of the justifications which made monasticism
precious in a later age, they were neither missionaries
nor men of learning. The monastery did not devote
itself either to sending out preachers and teachers, or
to storing up and cherishing the literary treasures
of the ancient world. The first abbot to whom it
occurred to turn the vast leisure of his monks to
good account by setting them systematically to work
at copying manuscripts was Cassiodorus, the ex-secretary
to King Theodoric the Goth [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 530-40].
Before his time monks and books had no special
connection with each other.
</p>

<p>
When a State contains masses of men who devote
their whole energies to a repulsively selfish attempt
to save their own individual souls, while letting the
world around them slide on as best it may, then the
body politic is diseased. The Roman Empire in its
fight with the barbarians was in no small degree
hampered by this attitude of so many of its subjects.
The ascetic took the barbarian invasions as judgments
from heaven rightly inflicted upon a wicked world,
and not as national calamities which called on every
citizen to join in the attempt to repel them. Many
men complacently interpreted the troubles of the fifth
century as the tribulations predicted in the Apocalypse,
and watched them develop with something like
joy, since they must portend the close approach of
the Second Advent of our Lord.
</p>

<p>
This apathetic attitude of many Christians during
<pb n='150'/><anchor id='Pg150'/>
the afflictions of the empire was maddening to the
heathen minority which still survived among the
educated classes. They roundly accused Christianity
of being the ruin of the State by its anti-social
teaching which led men to neglect every duty of the
citizen. The Christian author Orosius felt himself
compelled to write a lengthy history to confute this
view, aiming his work at the pagan Symmachus
whose book had been devoted to tracing all the
calamities of the world to the conversion of
Constantine.
</p>

<p>
It was fortunate for the empire that its governing
classes continued to preserve the old traditions of
Roman state-craft, and fought on doggedly against
all the ills of their time&mdash;barbarian invasion, famine,
and pestilence, instead of bowing to the yoke and
recognizing in every calamity the righteous judgment
of heaven and the indication of the approaching end
of the world.
</p>

<p>
Paganism had practically disappeared by the end
of the fifth century as an active force; none save a
few philosophers made an open profession of it, and
in 529 Justinian put a formal end to their teaching, by
closing the schools of Athens, the last refuge of the
professors of the expiring religion. But if open
heathenism was dead, a large measure of indifferentism
prevailed among the educated classes: many men
who in the fifth century would have been pagans were
Christians in name in the sixth, but little affected by
Christianity in their lives. This type was extremely
common among the literary and official classes. There
are plenty of sixth-century authors&mdash;Procopius may
<pb n='151'/><anchor id='Pg151'/>
serve as an example&mdash;whose works show no trace of
Christian thought, though the writer was undoubtedly
a professing member of the Church. Similar examples
could be quoted by the dozen from among
the administrators, lawyers, and statesmen of the day,
but all were now nominally Christian. As time went on,
such men grew rarer, and the old stern, non-religious
Roman character passed away into the emotional
and superstitious mediæval type of mind. The
survival of pre-Christian feeling, which appeared as
indifferentism among the educated classes, took a very
different shape among the lower strata of society. It
revealed itself in a crowd of gross superstitions
connected with magic, witchcraft, fortune-telling,
charms, and trivial or obscene ceremonies practised
in secret. The State highly disapproved of such
practices, treated them as impious or heretical, and
imposed punishment on those who employed them:
but nevertheless these contemptible survivals of
heathenism persisted down to the latest days of the
empire.
</p>

<p>
It has been usual to include all the Eastern Romans
of all the centuries between Constantine I. and Constantine
XIV. in one sweeping condemnation, as
cowardly, corrupt, and effete. The ordinary view of
Byzantine life may be summed up in Mr. Lecky's
irritating statement<note place='foot'><q>History of European Morals,</q> ii. p. 13.</note> that <q>the universal verdict of
history is that it constitutes the most base and despicable
form that civilization ever assumed, and that
there has been no other enduring civilization so absolutely
destitute of all the forms and elements of
<pb n='153'/><anchor id='Pg153'/>
greatness, none to which the epithet <emph>mean</emph> may be so
emphatically applied. It is a monstrous story of the
intrigues of priests, eunuchs, and women; of poisoning,
conspiracies, uniform ingratitude, perpetual
fratricide.</q> How Mr. Lecky obtained his universal
verdict of history, it is hard to see: certainly that
verdict can not have been arrived at after a study of
the evidence bearing on the life of the persons accused.
It sounds like a cheap echo of the second-hand historians
of fifty years ago, whose staple commodity was
Gibbon-and-water.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/fig-19.png' rend='width: 60%'>
    <head>Illuminated Initials. (<hi rend='italic'>From Byzantine MSS.</hi>)
(<hi rend='italic'>From "L'Art Byzantin." Par C. Bayet. Paris, Quantin, 1883.</hi>)</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
If we must sum up the characteristics of the East
Romans and their civilization, the conclusion at which
we arrive will be very different. It is only fair to
acknowledge that they had their faults: what else could
be expected when we know that the foundations of the
Eastern Empire were laid upon the Oriental provinces
of the old Roman world, among races that had long
been stigmatized by their masters as hopelessly effete
and corrupt&mdash;Syrians, Egyptians, and Hellenized
Asiatics, whom even the degenerate Romans of the
third century had been wont to despise. The Byzantine
Empire displayed from its very cradle a taint of
weakness derived from this Oriental origin. It showed
features particularly obnoxious to the modern mind of
the nineteenth century&mdash;such as the practice of a
degrading and grovelling court etiquette, full of prostrations
and genuflexions, the introduction of eunuchs
and slaves into high offices of State, the wholesale
and deliberate use of treachery and lying in matters
of diplomacy.
</p>

<p>
But remembering its origins we shall, on the
<pb n='154'/><anchor id='Pg154'/>
whole, wonder at the good points in Byzantine civilization
rather than at its faults. It may fairly be
said that Christianity raised the Roman East to a
better moral position than it had known for a thousand
years. With all their faults the monks and
hermits of the fifth century are a good substitute for
the priests of Cybele and Mithras of the second. It
was something that the Government and the public
opinion of the day had concurred to sweep away the
orgies of Daphne and Canopus. Church and State
united in the reign of Justinian to punish with spiritual
and bodily death the unnatural crimes which had been
the open practice of emperors themselves in the first
centuries of the empire.
</p>

<p>
The vices of which the East Romans have most
commonly been accused are cowardice, frivolity, and
treachery. On each of these points they have been
grossly wronged. Cowardice was certainly not the
chief characteristic of the centuries that produced
emperors like Theodosius I. and Heraclius, prelates
like Athanasius and Chrysostom, public servants like
Belisarius and Priscus. It is not for cowardice that
we note the Byzantine populace which routed Gainas
and his mercenaries, and raised the <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Nika</foreign> sedition, but
for turbulence. If military virtue was wanting to the
East-Roman armies, how came the Ostrogoth and
Vandal to be conquered, the Persian and the Hun to
be driven off, how, above all, was the desperate struggle
against the fanatical Saracen protracted for four
hundred years, till at last the Caliphate broke up?
</p>

<p>
Frivolity and luxury are an accusation easy to bring
against any age. Every moralist, from Jeremiah to
<pb n='155'/><anchor id='Pg155'/>
Juvenal, and from Juvenal to Mr. Ruskin, has believed
his own generation to be the most obnoxious and
contemptible in the world's history. We have numerous
tirades against the manners of Constantinople preserved
in Byzantine literature, and may judge from
them something of the faults of the time. It would
seem that there was much of the sort of luxury to
which ascetic preachers take exception&mdash;much splendour
of raiment, much ostentatious display of plate
and furniture, of horses and chariots. Luxury and
evil living often go together, but when we examine all
the enormities laid to the charge of the Byzantines,
there is less alleged than we might expect. When
Chrysostom raged against the contemporaries of
Arcadius, his anathemas fell on such crimes as the use
of cosmetics and dyes by fashionable dames, on the
gambling propensities of their husbands, on the immoral
tendencies of the theatre, on the drunken orgies
at popular festivals&mdash;accusations to which any age&mdash;our
own included&mdash;might plead guilty. The races of
the Circus played a disproportionate part in social life,
and attracted the enthusiastic attention of thousands
of votaries; but it is surely hard that our own age,
with all its sporting and athletic interests, should cast
a stone at the sixth century. We have not to look far
around us to discover classes for whom horse-racing
still presents an inexplicable attraction. When we
remember that the Constantinopolitans were excitable
Orientals, and had no other form of sport to distract
their attention from the Circus, we can easily realize the
genesis of the famous riots of the Blues and Greens.
</p>

<p>
From the darker forms of vice great cities have
<pb n='156'/><anchor id='Pg156'/>
never been free, and there is no reason to think that
Constantinople in the sixth century differed from
London in the nineteenth. It is fair to point out that
Christian public opinion and the Government strove
their best to put down sexual immorality. Theodosius
and Justinian are recorded to have entered upon
the herculean task of endeavouring to suppress all
disorderly houses: the latter made exile the penalty
for panders and procuresses, and inflicted death on
those guilty of the worst extremes of immorality.
We must remember, too, that if Constantinople showed
much vice, it also displayed shining examples of the
social virtues. The Empress Flaccilla was wont to
frequent the hospitals, and tend the beds of the sick.
Of the monastic severity which the Empress Pulcheria
displayed in the palace we have spoken already.
</p>

<p>
After cowardice and light morals, it is treachery
that is popularly cited as the most prominent vice of
the Eastern Empire. There have been other states
and epochs more given to plots and revolts, but it is
still true that there was too much intrigue at Constantinople.
The reason is not far to seek: the
<q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>carrière ouverte aux talents</foreign></q> practically existed
there, and the army and the civil service were full of
poor, able, and ambitious men of all races and classes
mixed together. The converted Goth or the renegade
Persian, the half-civilized mountaineer from Isauria,
the Copt and Syrian and Armenian were all welcomed
in the army or civil service, if only they had
ability. Both the bureaucracy and the army therefore
had elements which lacked patriotism, conscience, and
stability, and were prone to seek advancement either
<pb n='157'/><anchor id='Pg157'/>
by intrigue or military revolt. This being granted, it
is perhaps astonishing to have to record that between
350 and 600 the empire never once saw its legitimate
ruler dethroned, either by palace intrigue or military
revolt. The fact that all the plots&mdash;and there were
many in the period&mdash;failed hopelessly, is, on the whole,
a proof that if there was much treachery there was
much loyalty among the East Romans. There have
certainly been periods in more recent times which show
a much worse record.<note place='foot'>Mr. Lecky speaks of the <q>perpetual fratricide</q> of the Byzantine
emperors. It may be interesting to point out that from 340 to 1453
there was not a single emperor murdered by a brother, and only one
dethroned by a brother. Two were dethroned by sons, but not murdered.</note> A single instance may suffice&mdash;Mediæval
Italy from the thirteenth to the fifteenth
century could produce far more shocking examples
of conscienceless and unjustifiable plotting than the
Byzantine Empire in the whole thousand years of its
existence.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='158'/><anchor id='Pg158'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>XII. The Coming Of The Saracens.</head>

<p>
After the peace of 628 the Roman and the Persian
Empires, drained of men and money, and ravaged
from end to end by each other's marauding armies,
sank down in exhaustion to heal them of their deadly
wounds. Never before had either power dealt its
neighbour such fearful blows as in this last struggle:
in previous wars the contest had been waged around
border fortresses, and the prize had been the conquest
of some small slice of marchland. But Chosroës and
Heraclius had struck deadly blows at the heart of
each other's empire, and harried the inmost provinces
up to the gates of each other's capitals. The Persian
had turned the wild hordes of the Avars loose on
Thrace, and the Roman had guided the yet wilder
Chazars up to the walls of Ctesiphon. Hence it came
to pass that at the end of the war the two powers
were each weaker than they had ever been before.
They were bleeding at every pore, utterly wearied and
exhausted, and desirous of nothing but a long interval
of peace to recover their lost strength.
</p>

<p>
Precisely at this moment a new and terrible enemy
<pb n='159'/><anchor id='Pg159'/>
fell upon the two war-worn combatants, and delivered
an attack so vehement that it was destined to destroy
the ancient kingdom of Persia and to shear away half
the provinces of the Roman Empire.
</p>

<p>
The politics of Arabia had up to this time been of
little moment either to Roman or Persian. Each of
them had allies among the Arab tribes, and had
sometimes sent an expedition or an embassy southward,
into the land beyond the Syrian desert. But
neither of them dreamed that the scattered and disunited
tribes of Arabia would ever combine or become
a serious danger.
</p>

<p>
But while Heraclius and Chosroës were harrying
each other's realms events of world-wide importance
had been taking place in the Arabian peninsula. For
the first and last time in history there had arisen
among the Arabs one of those world-compelling
minds that are destined to turn aside the current of
events into new channels, and change the face of
whole continents.
</p>

<p>
Mahomet, that strangest of moral enigmas, prophet
and seer, fanatic and impostor, was developing his
career all through the years of the Persian war. By
an extraordinary mixture of genuine enthusiasm and
vulgar cunning, of self-deception and deliberate imposture,
of benevolence and cruelty, of austerity and
licence, he had worked himself and his creed to the
front. The turbulent polytheists of Arabia had by
him been converted into a compact band of fanatics,
burning to carry all over the world by the force of
their swords their new war-cry, that <q>God was God,
and Mahomet His prophet.</q>
</p>

<pb n='160'/><anchor id='Pg160'/>

<p>
In 628, the last year of the great war, the Arab
sent his summons to Heraclius and Chosroës, bidding
them embrace Islam. The Persian replied with the
threat that he would put the Prophet in chains when
he had leisure. The Roman made no direct reply,
but sent Mahomet some small presents, neglecting the
theological bent of his message, and only thinking of
enlisting a possible political ally. Both answers were
regarded as equally unsatisfactory by the Prophet, and
he doomed the two empires to a similar destruction.
Next year [629] the first collision between the East-Romans
and the Arabs took place, a band of Moslems
having pushed a raid up to Muta, near the Dead Sea.
But it was not till three years later, when Mahomet
himself was already dead, that the storm fell on the
Roman Empire. In obedience to the injunctions of
his deceased master, the Caliph Abu Bekr prepared
two armies, and launched the one against Palestine
and the other against Persia.
</p>

<p>
Till the last seven or eight years English writers
have been inclined to underrate the force and fury of
an army of Mahometan fanatics in the first flush of
their enthusiasm. Now that we have witnessed in
our own day the scenes of Tamaai and Abu Klea we
do so no longer. The rush that can break into a
British square bristling with Martini-Henry rifles is
not a thing to be despised. For the future we shall
not treat lightly the armies of the early Caliphs, nor
scoff with Gibbon at the feebleness of the troops who
were routed by them. If the soldiers of Queen
Victoria, armed with modern rifles and artillery, found
the fanatical Arab a formidable foe, let us not blame
<pb n='161'/><anchor id='Pg161'/>
the soldiers of Heraclius who faced the same enemy
with pike and sword alone. In the early engagements
between the East-Romans and the Saracens the
superior discipline and more regular arms of the one
were not a sufficient counterpoise to put against the
mad recklessness of the other. The Moslem wanted
to get killed, that he might reap the fruits of martyrdom
in the other world, and cared not how he died,
if he had first slain an enemy. The Roman fought
well enough; but he did not, like his adversary, yearn
to become a martyr, and the odds were on the man
who held his life the cheapest.
</p>

<p>
The moment of the Saracen invasion was chosen
most unhappily for Heraclius. He had just paid off
the enormous debt that he had contracted to the
Church, and to do so had not only drained the treasury
but imposed some new and unwise taxes on the
harassed provincials, and disbanded many of his
veterans for the sake of economy. Syria and Egypt,
after spending twelve and ten years respectively under
the Persian yoke, had not yet got back into their old
organization. Both countries were much distracted
with religious troubles; the heretical sects of the
Monophysites and Jacobites who swarmed within
their boundaries had lifted up their heads under the
Persian rule, being relieved from the governmental
repression that had hitherto been their lot. They
seem to have constituted an actual majority of the
population, and bitterly resented the endeavours of
Heraclius to enforce orthodoxy in the reconquered
provinces. Their discontent was so bitter that during
the Saracen invasion they stood aside and refused to
<pb n='162'/><anchor id='Pg162'/>
help the imperial armies, or even on occasion aided the
alien enemy.
</p>

<p>
The details of the Arab conquest of Syria have
not been preserved by the East-Roman historians,
who seem to have hated the idea of recording the
disasters of Christendom. The Moslems, on the other
hand, had not yet commenced to write, and ere
historians arose among them, the tale of the invasion
had been intertwined with a whole cycle of romantic
legends, fitter for the <q>Arabian Nights</q> than the
sober pages of a chronicle.
</p>

<p>
But the main lines of the war can be reconstructed
with accuracy. The Saracen horde under Abu Obeida
emerged from the desert in the spring of 634 and
captured Bostra, the frontier city of Syria to the east,
by the aid of treachery from within. The Romans
collected an army to drive them off, but in July it
was defeated at Aijnadin [Gabatha] in Ituraea.
Thoroughly roused by this disaster Heraclius set all
the legions of the East marching, and sixty thousand
men crossed the Jordan and advanced to recover
Bostra. The Arabs met them at the fords of the
Hieromax, an Eastern tributary of the Jordan, and a
fierce battle raged all day. The Romans drove the
enemy back to the very gates of their camp, but a
last charge, headed by the fierce warrior Khaled, broke
their firm array when a victory seemed almost assured.
All the mailed horsemen of Heraclius, his Armenian
and Isaurian archers, his solid phalanx of infantry,
were insufficient to resist the wild rush of the Arabs.
Urged on by the cry of their general, <q>Paradise is
before you, the devil and hell-fire behind,</q> the fanatical
<pb n='163'/><anchor id='Pg163'/>
Orientals threw themselves on regiment after regiment
and drove it off the field.
</p>

<p>
All Syria east of Jordan was lost in this fatal battle.
Damascus, its great stronghold, resisted desperately
but fell early in 635. Most of its population were
massacred. This disaster drew Heraclius into the
field, though he was now over sixty, and was beginning
to fail in health. He could do nothing; Emesa and
Heliopolis were sacked before his eyes, and after an
inglorious campaign he hurried to Jerusalem, took the
<q>True Cross</q> from its sanctuary, where he had
replaced it in triumph five years before, and retired to
Constantinople. Hardly had he reached it when the
news arrived that his discontented and demoralized
troops had proclaimed a rebel emperor, though the
enemy was before them. The rebel&mdash;his name was
Baanes&mdash;was put down, but meanwhile Antioch,
Chalcis, and all Northern Syria fell into the hands of
the Arabs.
</p>

<p>
Worse yet was to follow. In the next year, 637,
Jerusalem fell, after a desperate resistance, protracted
for more than twelve months. The inhabitants
refused to surrender except to the Caliph in person,
and the aged Omar came over the desert, proud to take
possession of the city which Mahomet had reckoned
the holiest site on earth save Mecca alone. The
Patriarch Sophronius was commanded to guide the
conqueror around the city, and when he saw the rude
Arab standing by the altar of the Church of the Holy
Sepulchre, cried aloud, <q>Now is the Abomination of
Desolation, which was spoken of by Daniel the
prophet, truly in the Holy Place.</q> The Caliph did
<pb n='164'/><anchor id='Pg164'/>
not confiscate any of the great Christian sanctuaries,
but he took the site of Solomon's Temple, and erected
on it a magnificent Mosque, known ever since as the
Mosque of Omar.
</p>

<p>
The tale of the last years of Heraclius is most
melancholy. The Emperor lay at Constantinople
slowly dying of dropsy, and his eldest son Constantine
had to take the field in his stead. But the young
prince received a crushing defeat in 638, when he
attempted to recover North Syria, and next year the
Arabs, under Amrou, pressed eastward across the
Isthmus of Suez, and threw themselves upon Egypt.
Two years more of fighting sufficed to conquer the
granary of the Roman Empire; and in February,
641, when Heraclius died, the single port of Alexandria
was the sole remaining possession of the
Romans in Egypt.
</p>

<p>
The ten years' war which had torn Syria and Egypt
from the hands of the unfortunate Heraclius had
been even more fatal to his Eastern neighbour. The
Arabs had attacked the Persian kingdom at the same
moment that they fell on Syria: two great battles at
Kadesia [636] and Yalulah [637] sufficed to place all
Western Persia in the hands of the Moslems. King
Isdigerd, the last of the Sassanian line, raised his last
army in 641, and saw it cut to pieces at the decisive
field of Nehauend. He fled away to dwell as an
exile among the Turks, and all his kingdom as far as
the borders of India became the prey of the conquerors.
</p>

<p>
Heraclius had married twice; by his first wife,
Eudocia, he left a single son, Constantine, who should
<pb n='165'/><anchor id='Pg165'/>
have been his sole heir. But he had taken a second
wife, and this wife was his own niece Martina. The
incestuous choice had provoked much scandal, and
was the one grave offence which could be brought
against Heraclius, whose life was in other respects
blameless. Martina, an ambitious and intriguing
woman, prevailed on her aged husband to make her
eldest son, Heracleonas, joint-heir with his half brother
Constantine.
</p>

<p>
This arrangement, as might have been expected,
worked very badly. The court and army was at once
split up between the adherents of the two young
Emperors, and while the defence of the empire against
the Saracens should have been the sole care of the
East-Romans, they found themselves distracted by
fierce Court intrigues. Armed strife between the
Emperors seemed destined to break out, but after
reigning only a few months Constantine III. died.
It was rumoured far and wide that his step-mother
had poisoned him, to make the way clear for her own
son Heracleonas, who immediately proclaimed himself
sole emperor. The senate and the Byzantine populace
were both highly indignant at this usurpation,
for the deceased Constantine left a young son named
Constans, who was thus excluded from the throne
to which he was the natural heir. Heracleonas had
reigned alone no more than a few weeks when the
army of the East and the mob of Constantinople
were heard demanding in angry tones that Constans
should be crowned as his uncle's colleague. Heracleonas
was frightened into compliance, but his
submission only saved him for a year. In the summer
<pb n='166'/><anchor id='Pg166'/>
of 642 the senate decreed his deposition, and he was
seized by the adherents of Constans and sent into
exile, along with his mother Martina. The victorious
faction very cruelly ordered the tongue of the mother
and the nose of the son to be slit&mdash;the first instance
of that hateful Oriental practice being applied to
members of the royal house, but not the last.
</p>

<p>
Constans II. was sole emperor from 642 to 668,
and his son and successor, Constantine IV., reigned
from 668 to 685. They were both strong, hard-headed
warrior princes, fit descendants of the gallant
Heraclius. Their main credit lies in the fact that
they fought unceasingly against the Saracen, and
preserved as a permanent possession of the empire
nearly every province that they had still remained
Roman at the death of Heraclius. During the
minority indeed of Constans II., Alexandria<note place='foot'>To the credit of Amrou and his Saracens it must be recorded that the
great Alexandrian Library was not burnt by them in sheer fanatical
wantonness as the legends tell. It had perished long before.</note> and
Aradus, the two last ports preserved by the Romans
in Egypt and Syria were lost. But the Saracens
advanced no further by land; the sands of the
African desert and the passes of Taurus were destined
to hold them back for many years. The times, however,
were still dangerous till the murder of the
Caliph Othman in 656, after which the outbreak of
the first civil war among the Moslems&mdash;the contest
of Ali and Moawiah for the Caliphate&mdash;gave the
empire a respite. Moawiah, who held the lands on
the Roman frontier&mdash;his rival's power lying further to
the east&mdash;secured a free hand against Ali, by making
<pb n='167'/><anchor id='Pg167'/>
peace with Constans. He even consented to pay
him a small annual subsidy so long as the truce
should last. This agreement was invaluable to the
empire. After twenty-seven years of incessant war
the mangled realm at last obtained an interval of
repose. It was something, too, that the Saracens
were induced to pause, and saw that the extension of
their conquests was not destined to spread at once
over the whole world. When they realized that their
victories were not to go on for ever, they lost the first
keenness of the fanatical courage which had made
them so terrible.
</p>

<p>
Freed from the Saracen war, which had threatened
not merely to curtail, but to extinguish the empire,
Constans was at liberty to turn his attention to other
matters. It seems probable that it was at this
moment that the reorganization of the provinces of
the empire took place, which we find in existence in
the second half of the seventh century. The old
Roman names and boundaries, which had endured
since Diocletian's time, now disappear, and the
empire is found divided into new provinces with
strange denominations. They were military in their
origin, and each consisted of the district covered by
a large unit of soldiery&mdash;what we should call an army
corps. <q>Theme</q> meant both the corps and the
district which it defended, and the corps-commander
was also the provincial governor. There were six
corps in Asia, called the Armeniac, Anatolic, Thracesian,
Bucellarian, Cibyrrhæot, and Obsequian themes.
Of these the first two explain themselves, they were
the <q>army of Armenia</q> and the <q>army of the East</q>;
<pb n='168'/><anchor id='Pg168'/>
the Obsequian theme, quartered along the Propontis,
was so called because it was a kind of personal guard
for the Emperor and the home districts. The Thracesians
were the <q>Army of Thrace,</q> who in the stress
of the war had been drafted across to Asia to reinforce
the Eastern troops. The Bucellarii seem to have
been corps composed of natives and barbarian auxiliaries
mixed; they are heard of long before Constans,
and he probably did no more than unite them
and localize them in a single district. The Cibyrrhæot
theme alone gets its name from a town, the
port of Cibyra in Pamphylia, which must have been
the original headquarters of the South-Western Army
Corps. Its commander had a fleet always in his
charge, and his troops were often employed as
marines.<note place='foot'>Mr. Bury's excellent chapter on <q>Themes,</q> in vol. ii. of his <q>Later
Roman Empire,</q> is most convincing as to these very puzzling provinces
and their origin.</note>
</p>

<p>
The western half of the empire seems to have
had six <q>Themes</q> also; they bear however old
and familiar names&mdash;Thrace, Hellas, Thessalonica,
Ravenna, Sicily, and Africa, and their names explain
their boundaries. In both halves of the empire there
were, beside the great themes, smaller districts under
the command of military governors, who had charge
of outlying posts, such as the passes of Taurus, or the
islands of Cyprus and Sardinia. Some of these afterwards
grew into independent themes.
</p>

<p>
Thus came to an end the old imperial system of
dividing military authority and civil jurisdiction,
which Augustus had invented and Diocletian perpetuated.
<pb n='169'/><anchor id='Pg169'/>
Under stress of the fearful Saracenic
invasion the civil governors disappear, and for the
future a commander chosen for his military capacity
has also to discharge civil functions.
</p>

<p>
Constans II., when once he had made peace with
Moawiah, would have done well to turn to the Balkan
Peninsula, and evict the Slavs from the districts south
of Haemus into which they had penetrated during
the reign of Heraclius. But he chose instead to do
no more than compel the Slavs to pay homage to
him and give tribute, and set out to turn westward,
and endeavour to drive the Lombards out of Italy.
Falling on the Duchy of Benevento, he took many
towns, and even laid siege to the capital. But he
failed to take it, and passed on to Rome, which had
not seen the face of an emperor for two hundred
years. When an emperor did appear he brought no
luck, for Constans signalized his visit by taking down
the bronze tiles of the Pantheon and sending them
off to Constantinople [664].
</p>

<p>
The Emperor lingered no less than five years in
the West, busied with the affairs of Italy and Africa,
till the Constantinopolitans began to fear that he
would make Rome or Syracuse his capital. But in 668
he was assassinated in a most strange manner. <q>As
he bathed in the baths called Daphne, Andreas his
bathing attendant smote him on the head with his soap-box,
and fled away.</q> The blow was fatal, Constans
died, and Constantine his son reigned in his stead.
</p>

<p>
Constantine IV., known as Pogonatus, <q>the
Bearded,</q> reigned for seventeen years, of which more
than half were spent in one long struggle with the
<pb n='170'/><anchor id='Pg170'/>
Saracens. Moawiah, the first of the Ommeyades, had
now made himself sole Caliph; the civil wars of the
Arabs were now over, and once more they fell on the
empire. Constantine's reign opened disastrously, with
simultaneous attacks by the armies and fleets of
Moawiah on Africa, Sicily, and Asia Minor. But
this was only the prelude; in 673 the Caliph made
ready an expedition, the like of which had never yet
been undertaken by the Saracens. A great fleet and
land army started from Syria to undertake the siege
of Constantinople itself, an enterprise which the
Moslems had not yet attempted. It was headed by
the general Abderrahman, and accompanied by Yezid,
the Caliph's son and heir. The fleet beat the imperial
navy off the sea, forced the passage of the
Dardanelles, and took Cyzicus. Using that city as
its base, it proceeded to blockade the Bosphorus.
</p>

<p>
The great glory of Constantine IV. is that he withstood,
defeated, and drove away the mighty armament
of Moawiah. For four years the investment of
Constantinople lingered on, and the stubborn resistance
of the garrison seemed unable to do more than
stave off the evil day. But the happy invention of
fire-tubes for squirting inflammable liquids (probably
the famous <q>Greek-fire</q> of which we first hear at
this time), gave the Emperor's fleet the superiority in
a decisive naval battle. At the same time a great
victory was won on land and thirty thousand Arabs
slain. Abderrahman had fallen during the siege,
and his successors had to lead back the mere wrecks
of a fleet and army to the disheartened Caliph.
</p>

<p>
It is a thousand pities that the details of this, the
<pb n='171'/><anchor id='Pg171'/>
second great siege of Constantinople, are not better
known. But there is no good contemporary historian
to give us the desired information. If he had but
met with his <q>sacred bard,</q> Constantine IV. might
have gone down to posterity in company with Heraclius
and Leo the Isaurian, as the third great hero of
the East-Roman Empire.
</p>

<p>
The year after the raising of the great siege, Moawiah
sued for peace, restored all his conquests, and
offered a huge war indemnity, promising to pay
3000 lbs. of gold per annum for thirty years. The
report of the triumph of Constantine went all over
the world, and ambassadors came even from the
distant Franks and Khazars to congratulate him on
the victory which had saved Eastern Christendom
from the Arab.
</p>

<p>
While Constantine was defending his capital from
the Eastern enemy, the wild tribes of his northern
border took the opportunity of swooping down on
the European provinces, whose troops had been drawn
off to resist the Arabs. The Slavs came down from
the inland, and laid siege for two years to Thessalonica,
which was only relieved from their attacks
when Constantine had finished his war with Moawiah.
But a far more dangerous attack was made by
another enemy in the eastern part of the Balkan
Peninsula. The Bulgarians, a nomad tribe of Finnish
blood, who dwelt in the region of the Pruth and
Dniester, came over the Danube, subdued the Slavs
of Moesia, and settled between the Danube and the
Eastern Balkans, where they have left their name till
this day. They united the scattered Slavonic tribes
<pb n='172'/><anchor id='Pg172'/>
of the region into a single strong state, and the new
Bulgarian kingdom was long destined to be a troublesome
neighbour to the empire. The date 679 counts
as the first year of the reign of Isperich first king of
Bulgaria. Constantine IV. was too exhausted by his
long war with Moawiah to make any serious attempt
to drive the Bulgarians back over the Danube, and
acquiesced in the new settlement.
</p>

<p>
The last six years of Constantine's reign were spent
in peace. The only notable event that took place in
them was the meeting at Constantinople of the Sixth
Oecumenical Council in 680-1. At this Synod, the
doctrine of the Monothelites, who attributed but one
will to Our Lord, was solemnly condemned by the
united Churches of the East and West. The holders
of Monothelite doctrines, dead and alive, were
solemnly anathematised, among them Pope Honorius
of Rome, who in a previous generation had consented
to the heresy.
</p>

<p>
Constantine IV. died in 685, before he had reached
his thirty-sixth year, leaving his throne to his eldest
son Justinian, a lad of sixteen.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='173'/><anchor id='Pg173'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>XIII. The First Anarchy.</head>

<p>
Justinian II., the last of the house of Heraclius,
was a sovereign of a different type from any emperor
that we have yet encountered in the annals of the
Eastern Empire. He was a bold, reckless, callous,
and selfish young man, with a firm determination to
assert his own individuality and have his own way,&mdash;he
was, in short, of the stuff of which tyrants are
made. Justinian was but seventeen when he came to
the throne, but he soon showed that he intended to
rule the empire after his own good pleasure long
before he had begun to learn the lessons of state-craft.
</p>

<p>
Ere he had reached his twenty-first year Justinian
had plunged into war with the Bulgarians. He
attacked them suddenly, inflicted several defeats on
their king, and took no less than thirty thousand
prisoners, whom he sent over to Asia, and forced to
enlist in the army of Armenia. He next picked a
quarrel with the Saracen Caliph on the most frivolous
grounds. The annual tribute due by the treaty of 679
had hitherto been paid in Roman <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>solidi</foreign>, but in 692
<pb n='174'/><anchor id='Pg174'/>
Abdalmalik tendered it in new gold coins of his own
mintage, bearing verses of the Koran. Justinian refused
to receive them, and declared war.
</p>

<p>
His second venture in the field was disastrous: his
unwilling recruits from Bulgaria deserted to the
enemy, when he met the Saracens at Sebastopolis in
Cilicia, and the Roman army was routed with great
slaughter. The two subsequent campaigns were
equally unsuccessful, and the troops of the Caliph
harried Cappadocia far and wide.
</p>

<p>
Justinian's wars depleted his treasury; yet he persisted
in plunging into expensive schemes of building
at the same time, and was driven to collect money
by the most reckless extortion. He employed two
unscrupulous ministers, Theodotus, the accountant
general&mdash;an ex-abbot who had deserted his monastery&mdash;and
the eunuch Stephanus, the keeper of the privy
purse. These men were to Justinian what Ralph
Flambard was to William Rufus, or Empson and
Dudley to Henry VII: they raised him funds by
flagrant extortion and illegal stretching of the law.
Both were violent and cruel: Theodotus is said to
have hung recalcitrant tax-payers up by ropes above
smoky fires till they were nearly stifled. Stephanus
thrashed and stoned every one who fell into his hands;
he is reported to have actually administered a
whipping to the empress-dowager during the absence
of her son, and Justinian did not punish him when he
returned.
</p>

<p>
While the emperor's financial expedients were
making him hated by the moneyed classes, he was
rendering himself no less unpopular in the army.
</p>

<pb n='175'/><anchor id='Pg175'/>

<p>
After his ill-success in the Saracen war, he began to
execute or imprison his officers, and to decimate his
beaten troops: to be employed by him in high command
was almost as dangerous as it was to be
appointed a general-in-chief during the dictatorship
of Robespierre.
</p>

<p>
In 695 the cup of Justinian's iniquities was full.
An officer named Leontius being appointed, to his
great dismay, general of the <q>theme</q> of Hellas, was
about to set out to assume his command. As he
parted from his friends he exclaimed that his days
were numbered, and that he should be expecting the
order for his execution to arrive at any moment.
Then a certain monk named Paul stood forth, and
bade him save himself by a bold stroke; if he would
aim a blow at Justinian he would find the people
and the army ready to follow him.
</p>

<p>
Leontius took the monk's counsel, and rushing to
the state prison, at the head of a few friends, broke it
open and liberated some hundreds of political
prisoners. A mob joined him, he seized the
Cathedral of St. Sophia, and then marched on the
palace. No one would fight for Justinian, who was
caught and brought before the rebel leader in company
with his two odious ministers. Leontius bade
his nose be slit, and banished him to Cherson. Theodotus
and Stephanus he handed over to the mob, who
dragged them round the city and burnt them alive.
</p>

<p>
Twenty years of anarchy followed the usurpation of
Leontius. The new emperor was not a man of
capacity, and had been driven into rebellion by his
fears rather than his ambition. He held the throne
<pb n='176'/><anchor id='Pg176'/>
barely three years, amid constant revolts at home and
defeats abroad. The Asiatic frontier was ravaged by
the armies of Abdalmalik, and at the same time a
great disaster befel the western half of the empire.
A Saracen army from Egypt forced its way into Africa,
where the Romans had still maintained themselves by
hard fighting while the emperors of the house of
Heraclius reigned. They reduced all its fortresses
one after the other, and finally took Carthage in 697&mdash;a
hundred and sixty-five years after it had been
restored to the empire by Belisarius.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/fig-20.png' rend='width: 80%'>
    <head>Church Of The Twelve Apostles At Thessalonica.
(<hi rend='italic'>From "L'Art Byzantin." Par Charles Bayet. Paris, Quantin, 1883.</hi>)</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<pb n='177'/><anchor id='Pg177'/>

<p>
The larger part of the army of Africa escaped by
sea from Carthage when the city fell. The officers
in command sailed for Constantinople, and during
their voyage plotted to dethrone Leontius. They
enlisted in their scheme Tiberius Apsimarus, who
commanded the imperial fleet in the Aegean, and proclaimed
him emperor when he joined them with his
galleys. The troops of Leontius betrayed the gates
of the capital to the followers of the rebel admiral,
and Apsimarus seized Constantinople. He proclaimed
himself emperor by the title of Tiberius, third
of that name, and condemned his captive rival to the
same fate that he himself had inflicted on Justinian
II. Accordingly the nose of Leontius was slit, and
he was placed in confinement in a monastery.
</p>

<p>
Tiberius III. was more fortunate in his reign than
his predecessor: his troops gained several victories
over the Saracens, recovered the frontier districts
which Justinian II. and Leontius had lost, and even
invaded Northern Syria. But these successes did not
save Tiberius from suffering the same doom which
had fallen on Justinian and Leontius. The people
and army were out of hand, the ephemeral emperor
could count on no loyalty, and any shock was sufficient
to upset his precarious throne.
</p>

<p>
We must now turn to the banished Justinian, who
had been sent into exile with his nose mutilated. He
had been transported to Cherson, the Greek town in
the Crimea, close to the modern Sebastopol, which
formed the northernmost outpost of civilization, and
enjoyed municipal liberty under the suzerainty of the
empire. Justinian displayed in his day of adversity
<pb n='178'/><anchor id='Pg178'/>
a degree of capacity which astonished his contemporaries.
He fled from Cherson and took refuge
with the Khan of the Khazars, the Tartar tribe who
dwelt east of the Sea of Azof. With this prince the
exile so ingratiated himself that he received in
marriage his sister, who was baptized and christened
Theodora. But Tiberius III. sent great sums of
money to the Khazar to induce him to surrender
Justinian, and the treacherous barbarian determined
to accept the bribe, and sent secret orders to two of
his officers to seize his brother-in-law. The emperor
learnt of the plot through his wife, and saved himself
by the bold expedient of going at once to one of the
two Khazar chiefs and asking for a secret interview.
When they were alone he fell on him and strangled
him, and then calling on the second Khazar served
him in the same fashion, before the Khan's orders
had been divulged to any one.
</p>

<p>
This gave him time to escape, and he fled in a
fishing boat out into the Euxine with a few friends
and servants who had followed him into exile. While
they were out at sea a storm arose, and the boat
began to fill. One of his companions cried to
Justinian to make his peace with God, and pardon
his enemies ere he died. But the Emperor's stern
soul was not bent by the tempest. <q>May God drown
me here,</q> he answered, <q>if I spare a single one of my
enemies if ever I get to land!</q> The boat weathered
the storm, and Justinian survived to carry out his
cruel oath. He came ashore in the land of the
Bulgarians, and soon won favour with their king
Terbel, who wanted a good excuse for invading the
<pb n='179'/><anchor id='Pg179'/>
empire, and found it in the pretence of supporting
the exiled monarch. With a Bulgarian army at his
back Justinian appeared before Constantinople, and
obtained an entrance at night near the gate of
Blachernæ. There was no fighting, for the adherents
of Tiberius were as unready to strike a blow for their
master as the followers of Leontius had been [705
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]
</p>

<p>
So Justinian recovered his throne without fighting,
for the people had by this time half forgotten his
tyranny, and regretted the rule of the house of
Heraclius. But they were soon to find out that they
had erred in submitting to the exile, and should have
resisted him at all hazards. Justinian came back in
a relentless mood, bent on nothing but revenging his
mutilated nose and his ten years of exile. His first
act was to send for the two usurpers who had sat
on his throne: Leontius was brought out from his
monastery, and Tiberius caught as he tried to flee
into Asia. Justinian had them led round the city in
chains, and then bound them side by side before his
throne in the Cathisma, the imperial box at the
Hippodrome. There he sat in state, using their prostrate
bodies as a footstool, while his adherents chanted
the verse from the ninety-first Psalm, <q>Thou shalt
tread on the lion and asp: the young lion and dragon
shalt thou trample under thy feet.</q> The allusion was
to the names of the usurpers, the Lion and Asp being
Leontius and Apsimarus!
</p>

<p>
After this strange exhibition the two ex-emperors
were beheaded. Their execution began a reign of
terror, for Justinian had his oath to keep, and was set
<pb n='180'/><anchor id='Pg180'/>
on wreaking vengeance on every one who had been
concerned in his deposition. He hanged all the chief
officers and courtiers of Leontius, and put out the
eyes of the patriarch who had crowned him. Then
he set to work to hunt out meaner victims: many
prominent citizens of Constantinople were sown up in
sacks and drowned in the Bosphorus. Soldiers were
picked out by the dozen and beheaded. A special
expedition was sent by sea to sack Cherson, the city
of the Emperor's exile, because he had a grudge
against its citizens. The chief men were caught and
sent to the capital, where Justinian had them bound
to spits and roasted.
</p>

<p>
These atrocities were mere samples of the general
conduct of Justinian. In a few years he had made
himself so much detested that it might be said that
he had been comparatively popular in the days of his
first reign.
</p>

<p>
The end came into 711, when a general named
Philippicus took arms, and seized Constantinople
while Justinian was absent at Sinope. The army of
the tyrant laid down their arms when Philippicus
approached, and he was led forth and beheaded
without further delay&mdash;an end too good for such a
monster. The conqueror also sought out and slew
his little son Tiberius, whom the sister of the Khan
of the Khazars had borne to him during his exile.
So ended the house of Heraclius, after it had sat for
five generations and one hundred and one years on
the throne of Constantinople.
</p>

<p>
The six years which followed were purely anarchical.
Justinian's wild and wicked freaks had completed the
<pb n='181'/><anchor id='Pg181'/>
demoralization which had already set in before his
restoration. Everything in the army and the state
was completely disorganized and out of gear. It
required a hero to restore the machinery of government
and evolve order out of chaos. But the hero
was not at once forthcoming, and the confusion went
on increasing.
</p>

<p>
To replace Justinian by Philippicus was only to
substitute King Log for King Stork. The new
emperor was a mere man of pleasure, and spent his
time in personal enjoyment, letting affairs of state
slide on as best they might. In less than two years
he was upset by a conspiracy which placed on the
throne Artemius Anastasius, his own chief secretary.
Philippicus was blinded, and compelled to exchange
the pleasures of the palace for the rigours of a
monastery. But the Court intrigue which dethroned
Philippicus did not please the army, and within two
years Anastasius was overthrown by the soldiers of
the Obsequian theme, who gave the imperial crown
to Theodosius of Adrammytium, a respectable but
obscure commissioner of taxes. More merciful than
any of his ephemeral predecessors, Theodosius III. dismissed
Anastasius unharmed, after compelling him to
take holy orders.
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile the organization of the empire was
visibly breaking up. <q>The affairs both of the realm
and the city were neglected and decaying, civil
education was disappearing, and military discipline
dissolved.</q> The Bulgarian and Saracen commenced
once more to ravage the frontier provinces, and every
year their ravages penetrated further inland. The
<pb n='182'/><anchor id='Pg182'/>
Caliph Welid was so impressed with the opportunity
offered to him, that he commenced to equip a great
armament in the ports of Syria with the express purpose
of laying siege to Constantinople. No one
hindered him, for the army raised to serve against
him turned aside to engage in the civil war between
Anastasius and Theodosius. The landmarks of the
Saracens' conquests by land are found in the falls of
the great cities of Tyana [710], Amasia [712], and
Antioch-in-Pisidia [713]. They had penetrated into
Phrygia by 716, and were besieging the fortress of
Amorium with every expectation of success, when at
last there appeared the man who was destined to
save the East-Roman Empire from a premature dismemberment.
</p>

<p>
This was Leo the Isaurian, one of the few military
officers who had made a great reputation amid the
fearful disasters of the last ten years. He was now
general of the <q>Anatolic</q> theme, the province which
included the old Cappadocia and Lycaonia. After
inducing the Saracens, more by craft than force, to
raise the siege of Amorium, Leo disowned his
allegiance to the incapable Theodosius and marched
toward the Bosphorus.
</p>

<p>
The unfortunate emperor, who had not coveted the
throne he occupied, nor much desired to retain it,
allowed his army to risk one engagement with the
troops of Leo. When it was beaten he summoned
the Patriarch, the Senate, and the chief officers of the
court, pointed out to them that a great Saracen
invasion was impending, that civil war had begun,
and that he himself did not wish to remain responsible
<pb n='183'/><anchor id='Pg183'/>
for the conduct of affairs. With his consent the
assembly resolved to offer the crown to Leo, who
formally accepted it early in the spring of 717.
</p>

<p>
Theodosius retired unharmed to Ephesus, where he
lived for many years. When he died the single word
ΥΓΙΕΙΑ, <q>Health,</q> was inscribed on his tomb according
to his last directions.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='184'/><anchor id='Pg184'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>XIV. The Saracens Turned Back.</head>

<p>
By dethroning Theodosius III. on the very eve of
the great Saracen invasion, Leo the Isaurian took
upon himself the gravest of responsibilities. With a
demoralized army, which of late had been more
accustomed to revolt than to fight, a depleted treasury,
and a disorganized civil service, he had to face an
attack even more dangerous than that which Constantine
IV. had beaten off thirty years before.
Constantine too, the fourth of a race of hereditary
rulers, had a secure throne and a loyal army, while
Leo was a mere adventurer who had seized the
crown only a few months before he was put to the
test of the sword.
</p>

<p>
The reigning Caliph was now Suleiman, the seventh
of the house of the Ommeyades. He had strained
all the resources of his wide empire to provide a fleet
and army adequate to the great enterprise which he
had taken in hand. The chief command of the
expedition was given to his brother Moslemah, who
led an army of eighty thousand men from Tarsus
across the centre of Asia Minor, and marched on
<pb n='185'/><anchor id='Pg185'/>
the Hellespont, taking the strong city of Pergamus
on his way. Meanwhile a fleet of eighteen hundred
sail under the vizier Suleiman, namesake of his
master the Caliph, sailed from Syria for the Aegean,
carrying a force no less than that which marched by
land. Fleet and army met at Abydos on the Hellespont
without mishap, for Leo had drawn back all his
resources, naval and military, to guard his capital.
</p>

<p>
In August, 717, only five months after his coronation,
the Isaurian saw the vessels of the Saracens sailing
up the Propontis, while their army had crossed into
Thrace and was approaching the city from the
western side. Moslemah caused his troops to build
a line of circumvallation from the sea to the Golden
Horn, cutting Constantinople off from all communication
with Thrace, while Suleiman blocked the
southern exit of the Bosphorus, and tried to close it
on the northern side also, so as to prevent any
supplies coming by water from the Euxine. Leo,
however, sallied forth from the Golden Horn with his
galleys and fire-vessels bearing the dreaded Greek
fire, and did so much harm to the detachment of
Saracen ships which had gone northward up the
strait, that the blockade was never properly established
on that side.
</p>

<p>
The Saracens relied more on starving out the city
than on taking it by storm: they had come provided
with everything necessary for a blockade of many
months, and sat down as if intending to remain before
the walls for an indefinite time. But Constantinople
had been provisioned on an even more lavish scale;
each family had been bidden to lay in a stock of corn
<pb n='186'/><anchor id='Pg186'/>
for no less a period than two years, and famine
appeared in the camp of the besiegers long ere it was
felt in the houses of the besieged. Nor had Moslemah
and Suleiman reckoned with the climate.
Hard winters occasionally occur by the Black Sea, as
our own army learnt to its cost in the Crimean War.
But the Saracens were served even worse by the
winter of 717-18, when the frost never ceased for
twelve weeks. Leo might have boasted, like Czar
Nicholas, that December, January, and February were
his best generals&mdash;for these months wrought fearful
havoc in the Saracen host. The lightly clad
Orientals could not stand the weather, and died off
like flies of dysentery and cold. The vizier Suleiman
was among those who perished. Meanwhile the
Byzantines suffered little, being covered by roofs all
the winter.
</p>

<p>
When next spring came round Moslemah would
have had to raise the siege if he had not been heavily
reinforced both by sea and land. A fleet of reserve
arrived from Egypt, and a large army came up from
Tarsus and occupied the Asiatic shores of the Bosphorus.
</p>

<p>
But Leo did not despair, and took the offensive in
the summer. His fire-ships stole out and burnt the
Egyptian squadron as it lay at anchor. A body of
troops landing on the Bithynian coast, surprised and
cut to pieces the Saracen army which watched the
other side of the strait. Soon, too, famine began to
assail the enemy; their stores of provisions were now
giving out, and they had harried the neighbourhood so
fiercely that no more food could be got from near at
<pb n='187'/><anchor id='Pg187'/>
hand, while if they sent foraging parties too far from
their lines they were cut off by the peasantry. At last
Moslemah suffered a disaster which compelled him to
abandon his task. The Bulgarians came down over
the Balkans, and routed the covering army which
observed Adrianople and protected the siege on the
western side. No less than twenty thousand Saracens
fell, by the testimony of the Arab historians
themselves, and the survivors were so cowed that
Moslemah gave the order to retire. The fleet ferried
the land army back into Asia, and both forces started
homeward. Moslemah got back to Tarsus with only
thirty thousand men at his back, out of more than
a hundred thousand who had started with him or
come to him as reinforcements. The fleet fared even
worse: it was caught by a tempest in the Aegean, and
so fearfully shattered that it is said that only five
vessels out of the whole Armada got back to Syria
unharmed.
</p>

<p>
Thus ended the last great endeavour of the Saracen
to destroy Constantinople. The task was never
essayed again, though for three hundred and fifty
years more wars were constantly breaking out
between the Emperor and the Caliph. In the future
they were always to be border struggles, not desperate
attempts to strike at the heart of the empire,
and conquer Europe for Islam. To Leo, far more
than to his contemporary the Frank Charles Martel,
is the delivery of Christendom from the Moslem
danger to be attributed. Charles turned back a
plundering horde sent out from an outlying province
of the Caliphate. Leo repulsed the grand-army of
<pb n='188'/><anchor id='Pg188'/>
the Saracens, raised from the whole of their eastern
realms, and commanded by the brother of their
monarch. Such a defeat was well calculated to
impress on their fatalistic minds the idea that Constantinople
was not destined by providence to fall
into their hands. They were by this time far removed
from the frantic fanaticism which had inspired their
grandfathers, and the crushing disaster they had now
sustained deterred them from any repetition of the
attempt. Life and power had grown so pleasant to
them that martyrdom was no longer an <q>end in
itself</q>; they preferred, if checked, to live and fight
another day.
</p>

<p>
Leo was, however, by no means entirely freed from
the Saracens by his victory of 718. At several epochs
in the latter part of his reign he was troubled by
invasions of his border provinces. None of them,
however, were really dangerous, and after a victory
won over the main army of the raiders in 739 at
Acroinon in Phrygia, Asia Minor was finally freed
from their presence.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='189'/><anchor id='Pg189'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>XV. The Iconoclasts. (<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 720-802.)</head>

<p>
If Leo the Isaurian had died on the day on which
the army of the Caliph raised the siege of Constantinople
it would have been well for his reputation in
history. Unhappily for himself, though happily
enough for the East-Roman realm, he survived yet
twenty years to carry through a series of measures
which were in his eyes not less important than the
repulse of the Moslems from his capital. Historians
have given to the scheme of reform which he took in
hand the name of the Iconoclastic movement, because
of the opposition to the worship of images which
formed one of the most prominent features of his
action.
</p>

<p>
For the last hundred years the empire had been
declining in culture and civilization; literature and
art seemed likely to perish in the never-ending clash
of arms: the old-Roman jurisprudence was being
forgotten, the race of educated civil servants was
showing signs of extinction, the governors of provinces
were now without exception rough soldiers,
<pb n='190'/><anchor id='Pg190'/>
not members of that old bureaucracy whose Roman
traditions had so long kept the empire together. Not
least among the signs of a decaying civilization were
the gross superstitions which had grown up of late in
the religious world. Christianity had begun to be
permeated by those strange mediæval fancies which
would have been as inexplicable to the old-Roman
mind of four centuries before as they are to the mind
of the nineteenth century. A rich crop of puerile
legends, rites, and observances had grown up of late
around the central truths of religion, unnoticed and
unguarded against by theologians, who devoted all
their energies to the barren Monothelite and Monophysite
controversies. Image-worship and relic-worship
in particular had developed with strange
rapidity, and assumed the shape of mere Fetishism.
Every ancient picture or statue was now announced
as both miraculously produced and endued with
miraculous powers. These wonder-working pictures
and statues were now adored as things in themselves
divine: the possession of one of them made the
fortune of a church or monastery, and the tangible
object of worship seems to have been regarded with
quite as much respect as the saint whose memory it
recalled. The freaks to which image-worship led
were in some cases purely grotesque; it was, for
example, not unusual to select a picture as the godfather
of a child in baptism, and to scrape off a little
of its paint and produce it at the ceremony to
represent the saint. Even patriarchs and bishops
ventured to assert that the hand of a celebrated
representation of the Virgin distilled fragrant balsam.
<pb n='191'/><anchor id='Pg191'/>
The success of the Emperor Heraclius in his Persian
campaign was ascribed by the vulgar not so much to
his military talent as to the fact that he carried with
him a small picture of the Virgin, which had fallen
from heaven!
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/fig-21.png' rend='width: 80%'>
    <head>Bishops, Monks, Kings, Laymen, And Women, Adoring The
Madonna. (<hi rend='italic'>From a Byzantine MS.</hi>)
(<hi rend='italic'>From "L'Art Byzantin." Par Charles Bayet. Paris, Quantin, 1883.</hi>)</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
All these vain beliefs, inculcated by the clergy and
eagerly believed by the mob, were repulsive to the
educated laymen of the higher classes. Their dislike
for vain superstitions was emphasized by the influence
<pb n='192'/><anchor id='Pg192'/>
of Mahometanism on their minds. For a hundred
years the inhabitants of the Asiatic provinces of the
empire had been in touch with a religion of which the
noblest feature was its emphatic denunciation of
idolatry under every shape and form. An East-Roman,
when taunted by his Moslem neighbour for
clinging to a faith which had grown corrupt and
idolatrous, could not but confess that there was too
much ground for the accusation, when he looked round
on the daily practice of his countrymen.
</p>

<p>
Hence there had grown up among the stronger
minds of the day a vigorous reaction against the prevailing
superstitions. It was more visible among the
laity than among the clergy, and far more widespread
in Asia than in Europe. In Leo the Isaurian this
tendency stood incarnate in its most militant form,
and he left the legacy of his enthusiasm to his descendants.
Seven years after the relief of Constantinople
he commenced his crusade against superstition.
The chief practices which he attacked were the worship
of images and the ascription of divine honours to
saints&mdash;more especially in the form of Mariolatry.
His son Constantine, more bold and drastic than his
father, endeavoured to suppress monasticism also, because
he found the monks the most ardent defenders
of images; but Leo's own measures went no further
than a determined attempt to put down image-worship.
</p>

<p>
The struggle which he inaugurated began in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
725, when he ordered the removal of all the images
in the capital. Rioting broke out at once, and the
officials who were taking down the great figure of
<pb n='193'/><anchor id='Pg193'/>
Christ Crucified, over the palace-gate, were torn to
pieces by a mob. The Emperor replied by a series of
executions, and carried out his policy all over the
empire by the aid of armed force.
</p>

<p>
The populace, headed by the monks, opposed a
bitter resistance to the Emperor's doings, more
especially in the European provinces. They set the
wildest rumours afloat concerning his intentions; it
was currently reported that the Jews had bought
his consent to image-breaking, and that the Caliph
Yezid had secretly converted him to Mahometanism.
Though Leo's orthodoxy in matters doctrinal was
unquestioned, and though he had no objection to the
representation of the cross, as distinguished from the
crucifix, he was accused of a design to undermine the
foundations of Christianity. Arianism was the least
offensive fault laid to his account. The Emperor's
enemies did not confine themselves to passive resistance
to his crusade against images. Dangerous
revolts broke out in Greece and Italy, and were not
put down without much fighting. In Italy, indeed,
the imperial authority was shaken to its foundations,
and never thoroughly re-established. The Popes
consistently opposed the Iconoclastic movement, and
by their denunciation of it placed themselves at the
head of the anti-imperial party, nor did they shrink
from allying themselves with the Lombards, who
were now, as always, endeavouring to drive the East-Roman
garrisons from Ravenna and Naples.
</p>

<p>
The hatred which Leo provoked might have been
fatal to him had he not possessed the full confidence
of the army. But his great victory over the Saracens
<pb n='194'/><anchor id='Pg194'/>
had won him such popularity in the camp, that he
was able to despise the wrath of the populace, and
carry out his schemes to their end. Beside instituting
ecclesiastical reforms he was a busy worker in all
the various departments of the administration. He
published a new code of laws, the first since Justinian,
written in Greek instead of Latin, as the latter
language was now quite extinct in the Balkan
Peninsula. He reorganized the finances of the
empire, which had fallen into hopeless confusion in
the anarchy between 695 and 717. The army had
much of his care, but it was more especially in the
civil administration of the empire that he seems to
have left his mark. From Leo's day the gradual
process of decay which had been observable since the
time of Justinian seems to come to an end, and for
three hundred years the reorganized East-Roman
state developed a power and energy which appear
most surprising after the disasters of the unhappy
seventh century. Having once lived down the
Saracen danger, the empire reasserted its ancient
mastery in the East, until the coming of the Turks in
the eleventh century. We should be glad to have
the details of Leo's reforms, but most unhappily the
monkish chroniclers who described his reign have
slurred over all his good deeds, in order to enlarge to
more effect on the iniquities of his crusade against
image-worship. The effects of his work are to be traced
mainly by noting the improved and well-ordered
state of the empire after his death, and comparing
it with the anarchy that had preceded his accession.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/fig-22.png' rend='width: 60%'>
    <head>Representation Of The Madonna Enthroned.
(<hi rend='italic'>From a Byzantine Ivory.</hi>)
(<hi rend='italic'>From "L'Art Byzantin." Par Charles Bayet. Paris, Quantin, 1883.</hi>)</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Leo died in 740, leaving the throne to his son,
<pb n='196'/><anchor id='Pg196'/>
Constantine V., whom he had brought up to follow
in his own footsteps. The new emperor was a good
soldier and a capable man of business, but his main
interest in life centred in the struggle against image-worship.
Where Leo had chastised the adherents of
superstition with whips Constantine chastised them
with scorpions. He was a true persecutor, and
executed not only rioters and traitors, as his father
had done, but all prominent opponents of his policy
who provoked his wrath. Hence he incurred an
amount of hatred even greater than that which encompassed
Leo III., and his very name has been
handed down to history with the insulting byword
<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Copronymus</foreign> tacked on to it.
</p>

<p>
Though strong and clever, Constantine was far
below his father in ability, and his reign was marked
by one or two disasters, though its general tenor was
successful enough. Two defeats in Bulgaria were
comparatively unimportant, but a noteworthy though
not a dangerous loss was suffered when Ravenna and
all the other East-Roman possessions in Central Italy
were captured by the Lombards in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 750. At this
time Pope Stephen, when attacked by the same enemy,
sent for aid to Pipin the Frank, instead of calling on
the Emperor, and for the future the papacy was for all
practical purposes dependent on the Franks and not
on the empire. The loss of the distant exarchate of
Ravenna seemed a small thing, however, when placed
by the side of Constantine's successes against the
Saracens, Slavs, and Bulgarians, all of whom he beat
back with great slaughter on the numerous occasions
when they invaded the empire.
</p>

<pb n='197'/><anchor id='Pg197'/>

<p>
But in the minds both of Constantine himself and
of his contemporaries, his dealings with things religious
were the main feature of his reign. He collected
a council of 338 bishops at Constantinople in 761,
at which image-worship was declared contrary to all
Christian doctrine, and after obtaining this condemnation,
attacked it everywhere as a heresy and not
merely a superstition. In the following year, finding
the monks the strongest supporters of the images, he
commenced a crusade against monasticism. He first
forbade the reception of any novices, and shortly
afterwards begun to close monasteries wholesale. We
are told that he compelled many of their inmates to
marry by force of threats; others were exiled to
Cyprus by the hundred; not a few were flogged and
imprisoned, and a certain number of prominent men
were put to death. These unwise measures had the
natural effect: the monks were everywhere regarded
as martyrs, and the image-worship which they
supported grew more than ever popular with the
masses.
</p>

<p>
While still in the full vigour of his persecuting
enthusiasm, Constantine Copronymus died in 775,
leaving the throne to his son, Leo IV., an Iconoclast,
like all his race, but one who imitated the milder
measures of his grandfather rather than the more
violent methods of his father. Leo was consumptive
and died young, after a reign of little more than four
years, in which nothing occurred of importance save
a great victory over the Saracens in 776. His crown
fell to his son, Constantine VI., a child of ten, while
the Empress-Dowager Irene became sole regent, and
<pb n='198'/><anchor id='Pg198'/>
her name was associated with that of her son in all
acts of state.
</p>

<p>
The Isaurian dynasty was destined to end in a
fearful and unnatural tragedy. The Empress Irene
was clever, domineering, and popular. The irresponsible
power of her office of regent filled her with
overweening ambition. She courted the favour of
the populace and clergy by stopping the persecution
of the image-worshippers, and filled all offices, civil
and military, with creatures of her own. For ten
years she ruled undisturbed, and grew so full of pride
and self-confidence that she looked forward with
dismay to the prospect of her son's attaining his
majority and claiming his inheritance. Even when
he had reached the age of manhood she kept him
still excluded from state affairs, and compelled him
to marry, against his will, a favourite of her own.
Constantine was neither precocious nor unfilial, but
in his twenty-second year he rebelled against his
mother's dictation, and took his place at the helm of
the state. Irene had actually striven to oppose him
by armed force, but he pardoned her, and after
secluding her for a short time, restored her to her
former dignity. The unnatural mother was far from
acquiescing in her son's elevation, and still dreamed
of reasserting herself. She took advantage of the
evil repute which Constantine won by a disastrous
war with Bulgaria, and an unhappy quarrel with the
Church, on the question of his divorce from the wife
who had been forced upon him. More especially,
however, she relied on her popularity with the
multitude, which had been won by stopping the
<pb n='199'/><anchor id='Pg199'/>
persecution of the image-worshippers during her
regency, for Constantine had resumed the policy of
his ancestors and developed strong Iconoclastic
tendencies when he came to his own.
</p>

<p>
In 797 Irene imagined that things were ripe for
attacking her son, and conspirators, acting by her
orders, seized the young emperor, blinded him, and
immured him in a monastery before any of his
adherents were able to come to his aid. Thus ended
the rule of the Isaurian dynasty. Constantine himself,
however, survived many years as a blind monk, and
lived to see the ends of no less than five of his
successors.
</p>

<p>
The wicked Irene sat on her ill-gained throne for
some five troublous years, much vexed by rebellion
abroad and palace intrigues at home. It is astonishing
that her reign lasted so long, but it would seem
that her religious orthodoxy atoned in the eyes of
many of her subjects for the monstrous crime of her
usurpation. The end did not come till 802, when
Nicephorus, her grand treasurer, having gained over
some of the eunuchs and other courtiers about her
person, quietly seized her and immured her in a
monastery in the island of Chalke. No blow was
struck by any one in the cause of the wicked empress,
and Nicephorus quietly ascended the throne.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/fig-23.png' rend='width: 60%'>
    <head>Details Of St. Sophia.</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Though containing little that is memorable in
itself, the reign of Irene must be noted as the severing-point
of that connection between Rome and Constantinople,
which had endured since the first days of
empire. In the year 800 Pope Leo III. crowned
Karl, King of the Franks, as Roman Emperor, and
<pb n='200'/><anchor id='Pg200'/>
transferred to him the nominal allegiance which he
had hitherto paid to Constantinople. Since the
Italian rebellion in the time of Constantine Copronymus,
that allegiance had been a mere shadow, and the
papacy had been in reality under Frankish influence.
But it was not till 800 that the final breach took place.
The Iconoclastic controversy had prepared the way
for it, while the fact that a woman sat on the imperial
throne served as a good excuse for the Pope's action.
Leo declared that a female reign was an anomaly and
an abomination, and took upon himself the onus of
ending it, so far as Italy was concerned, by creating
a new emperor of the West. There was, of course,
<pb n='201'/><anchor id='Pg201'/>
no legality in the act, and Karl the Great was in no
real sense the successor of Honorius and Romulus
Augustulus, but he ruled a group of kingdoms which
embraced the larger half of the old Western Empire,
and formed a fair equipoise to the realm now ruled by
Irene. From 800, then, onward we have once more
a West-Roman empire in existence as well as the
East-Roman, and it will be convenient for many
purposes to use the adjective Byzantine instead of
the adjective Roman, when we are dealing with the
remaining history of the realm that centred at
Constantinople.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='202'/><anchor id='Pg202'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>XVI. The End Of The Iconoclasts.
(<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 802-886.)</head>

<p>
The Iconoclastic controversy was far from being
extinguished with the fall of the house of Leo the
Isaurian. It was destined to continue in a milder
form for more than half a century after the dethronement
of Constantine VI. The lines on which it was
fought out were still the same&mdash;the official hierarchy
and the Asiatic provinces favoured Iconoclasm, the
clergy and the European provinces were <q>Iconodules.</q><note place='foot'><q>Slaves to images</q>; a term of contempt not unfairly applied to
the image-worshippers.</note>
Hence it is interesting to note that through the greater
part of the ninth century, while emperors of Eastern
birth sat on the throne, the views of Leo the Isaurian
were still in vogue, and that the eventual triumph of
the image-worshippers only came about when a royal
house sprung from one of the European themes&mdash;the
family of Basil the Macedonian&mdash;gained possession of
the crown.
</p>

<p>
The treasurer, Nicephorus, who overthrew Irene,
<pb n='203'/><anchor id='Pg203'/>
and so easily obtained possession of the empire, was
of Oriental extraction. His ancestor had been a
Christian Arab prince, expelled from his country at
the time of the rise of Mahomet, and his family had
always dwelt in Asia Minor. Hence we are not
surprised to find that Nicephorus was an Iconoclast,
and refused to follow in the steps of Irene in the
direction of restoring image-worship. He did not
persecute the <q>Iconodules,</q> as the Isaurians had done,
but he gave them no personal encouragement. This
being so, it is natural that we should find his character
described in the blackest terms by the monkish
chroniclers of the succeeding century. He was, we
are told, a hypocrite, an oppresser, and a miser; but
we cannot find any very distinct traces of the operation
of such vices in his conduct during the nine years of
his reign. He was not, however, a very fortunate
ruler; though he put down with ease several insurrections
of discontented generals, he was unlucky with
his foreign wars. The Caliph Haroun-al-Raschid did
much harm to the Asiatic provinces, ravaging the
whole country as far as Ancyra, nor could Nicephorus
get rid of him without signing a rather ignominious
peace, and paying a large war-indemnity. A yet
greater disaster concluded another war. Nicephorus
invaded Bulgaria in 811, to punish King Crumn for
ravaging Thrace. The Byzantine army won a battle
and sacked the palace and capital of the Bulgarian
king; but a few days later Nicephorus allowed himself
to be surprised by a night attack on his camp. In
the panic and confusion the emperor fell, and his son
and heir, Stauracius, was desperately wounded. The
<pb n='204'/><anchor id='Pg204'/>
routed army did not stay its flight till Adrianople, and
left the body of the Emperor in the hands of the
Bulgarians, who cut off his head, and made the skull
into a drinking-cup, just as the Lombards had dealt
with the skull of King Cunimund three hundred years
before.<note place='foot'>See p. <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
Stauracius, the only son of Nicephorus, was proclaimed
emperor, but it soon became evident that his
wound was mortal, and Michael Rhangabe, his brother-in-law,
who had married the eldest daughter of Nicephorus,
took his place on the throne before the breath
was out of the dying emperor's body.
</p>

<p>
Michael I. was a weak, good-natured man, who
owed his elevation to the mere chance of his marriage.
He was a devoted servant and admirer of monks,
and began to undo the work of his father-in-law, and
remove all Iconoclasts from office. This provoked
the wrath of that powerful party, and led to conspiracies
against Michael, but he might have held his
own if it had not been for the disgracefully incompetent
way in which he conducted the Bulgarian war. He
allowed an enemy whom the East-Romans had hitherto
despised, not only to ravage the open country in
Thrace, but to storm the fortresses of Mesembria and
Anchialus, and to push their invasions up to the gates
of Constantinople. The discontent of the army found
vent in a mutiny, and Leo the Armenian, an officer
of merit and capacity, was proclaimed emperor in the
camp. Michael I. made no resistance, and retired into
a monastery after only two years of reign. [811-13.]
</p>

<p>
Leo the Armenian proved himself worthy of the
<pb n='205'/><anchor id='Pg205'/>
confidence of the army. When the Bulgarians
appeared in front of the walls of Constantinople they
were repulsed, but Leo tarnished the glory of his
success by a treacherous attempt to assassinate King
Crumn at a conference&mdash;a crime as unnecessary as it
was unsuccessful, for the Emperor might, as the event
proved, have trusted to the sword instead of the
dagger. In the next spring he took the offensive
himself, marched out to Mesembria, and inflicted on
the enemy such a sanguinary defeat that hardly a
man escaped his sword, and Bulgaria was so weakened
that it gave no further trouble for more than fifty years.
</p>

<p>
Almost the moment that he was freed from the
Bulgarian war, Leo became involved in the fatal
Iconoclastic controversy. Being a native of an
Oriental theme, he was naturally imbued with the
views of his great namesake, the Isaurian, and inclined
to reverse the policy of the monk-loving Michael I.
But being moderate and wary he tried to introduce,
without the use of force, a middle policy between
image-breaking and image-worship&mdash;a fruitless attempt,
which only brought him the nickname of <q>the
Chameleon.</q> Leo's idea was the quaint device of
permitting the use of images, but of hanging them so
high from the ground that the public should not be
able to touch or kiss them! This pleased nobody;
on the one side, the patriarch and his monks inveighed
against the moving of the images, while, on the other,
tumultuous companies of Asiatic soldiery broke into
churches and mutilated all the pictures and figures
they could find. The seven years of Leo's reign were
full of ecclesiastical bickerings, but it should be
<pb n='206'/><anchor id='Pg206'/>
remembered to his credit that no single person
suffered death for his conscience' sake in the whole
period. The most violent of the opponents of the
Emperor were merely interned in remote monasteries,
when they ventured to set their will against his.
Long ere the end of his reign, Leo had been compelled
to leave his half measures and prohibit all use of images.
Like Constantine Copronymus, he called a council to
endorse his action, and a majority of the Eastern
bishops resolved that Iconolatry was a dangerous
heresy, and anathematized the patriarch Nicephorus
and all other defenders of the images.
</p>

<p>
Leo's reign was prosperous in all save the matter
of his religious troubles. But he was not destined to
die in peace in his bed. Michael the Amorian, the
best general in the empire, was detected in a conspiracy
against his master. Leo cast him into prison,
but delayed his punishment, and left his accomplices
at large. Michael had many friends in the palace who
determined to strike a blow ere the Emperor should
have discovered their guilt. They resolved to slay
Leo in his private chapel, as he attended matins on
Christmas Day, for he was accustomed to come
unarmed and unguarded to the early communion.
Accordingly, the conspirators attended the service,
and attacked the Emperor in the midst of the
Eucharistic hymn. Leo snatched the heavy metal
cross off the altar and struck down some of his
assailants, but numbers were too many for him, and
he was cut down and slain at the very foot of the
holy table. [Christmas Day, 820.]
</p>

<p>
Michael the Amorian was dragged out of his
<pb n='207'/><anchor id='Pg207'/>
dungeon, saluted as emperor, and crowned, even
before the fetters were off his feet. It was not till the
ceremony had been performed that time was found to
send for a smith to strike away the rings.
</p>

<p>
Michael was by birth a mere peasant, but had
raised himself to high rank in the army by his
courage and ability. He is sometimes styled <q>the
Amorian,</q> from his birth-place, Amorium in Phrygia,
but more often mentioned by his nickname of <q>the
Stammerer.</q> He had been the friend and adviser of
Leo the Armenian at the time of the latter's elevation
to the throne, and his conspiracy must be reckoned a
gross piece of ingratitude, even though we acknowledge
that he was not personally responsible for his
master's murder.
</p>

<p>
Though rough and uncultured, Michael was a man
of very considerable ability. He strengthened his
title to the crown by a marriage with the last scion of
the Isaurian house, the princess Euphrosyne, daughter
of the blind Constantine VI. The religious difficulties
of the day he endeavoured to treat in an absolutely
impartial way, so as to offend neither Iconoclasts nor
Iconodules. He recalled from exile the image-worshipping
monks whom Leo the Armenian had sent to
distant monasteries, and proclaimed that for the future
every subject of the empire should enjoy complete
liberty of conscience on the disputed question. This
was far from satisfying the image-worshippers, who
wished Michael to restore their idols to their ancient
places: but the Amorian would not consent to this,
and obtained but a very qualified measure of approval
from the monastic party.
</p>

<pb n='208'/><anchor id='Pg208'/>

<p>
It was not to be expected that the reign of a
military usurper, with no title to the throne whatever,
would be untroubled by revolts. Michael had his
share of such afflictions, and though he finally slew
Thomas and Euphemius, the two pretenders who laid
claim to his crown, yet by their means he lost two not
inconsiderable provinces of his empire. While the
rebellion of Thomas was in progress, an army of
Saracens from Alexandria threw themselves on the
island of Crete, and conquered it from end to end.
When Michael's hands were free he sent two great
armaments to expel the intruders, but both failed, and
Crete was destined to remain for a whole century in
Moslem hands. Its hundred harbours became the
haunts of innumerable Corsairs, who grew to be the
bane of commerce in the Levant, and were a serious
danger to the empire whenever its fleet fell into bad
hands and failed to keep the police of the seas.
</p>

<p>
A similar rising in Sicily under a rebel named
Euphemius led to the invasion of that island by an
army of Moors from Africa, who landed in 827, and
maintained a foothold in spite of all efforts to expel
them. At first their gains were not rapid, but in the
time of Michael's successors they gradually won for
themselves the whole of the island.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/fig-24.png' rend='width: 80%'>
    <head>Byzantine Metal Work (Our Lord and the Twelve Apostles).
(<hi rend='italic'>From "L'Art Byzantin." Par Charles Bayet. Paris, Quantin, 1883.</hi>)</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
After nine years of reign the Amorian died a
natural death, still wearing the crown he had won.
It was just fifty years since any ruler of the empire
had met such a peaceful end. He was succeeded by
his son Theophilus, a vehement Iconoclast, whose
persecuting tendencies had been with difficulty restrained
in his father's life-time. His accession was
<pb n='209'/><anchor id='Pg209'/>
the signal for a new campaign against image-worship;
he induced the patriarch John the Grammarian, a
strong Iconoclast like himself, to excommunicate as
idolaters all who differed from him, and began to flog,
banish, and imprison their leading men. His persecution
would have been almost as vehement as that of
<pb n='210'/><anchor id='Pg210'/>
Constantine Copronymus, but for the fact that he did
not ever inflict the punishment of death; branding
and mutilation however he did not disdain.
</p>

<p>
The Iconodules saw the vengeance of heaven for
the misdeeds of Theophilus in the disasters which he
suffered in war from the Saracens. He fell out with
the Caliph Motassem, and in the first campaign took
and burnt the town of Zapetra, for which the Commander
of the Faithful had great regard.<note place='foot'>It is said to have been either his birth-place or that of his mother.</note> This roused
Motassem to furious wrath; he swore that he would
destroy in revenge the town which Theophilus held
most dear; he collected the largest Saracen army that
had been seen since Moslemah beleaguered Constantinople
in 717, and marched out of Tarsus with 130,000
men, each of whom (if legend speaks true) had the
word Amorium painted on his shield. For it was
Amorium, the birth-place of the Emperor, and the
home of his ancestors that Motassem had sworn
to sack. While one division of the Caliph's army
defeated Theophilus, who had taken the field in
person, another headed by Motassem himself marched
straight on Amorium, and took it after a brave defence
of fifty-five days. Thirty thousand of its inhabitants
were massacred, and the town was burnt, but the
Caliph then turned home satisfied with his revenge,
and the empire suffered nothing more from this most
dangerous invasion. The Saracen war dragged on in
an indecisive way, but no further disaster was encountered.
</p>

<p>
There are other things to be recorded of Theophilus
beside his persecution of image-worshippers and his
<pb n='211'/><anchor id='Pg211'/>
war with the Caliph. He was long remembered for
his taste for gorgeous display; of all the East-Roman
emperors he seems to have delighted the most in gold
and silver work, gems and embroidery. His golden
plane-tree was the talk of the East, and the golden
lions at the foot of his throne, which rose and roared
by the means of ingenious machinery within, were
remembered for generations.
</p>

<p>
Nor should the curious tale of his second marriage
be left untold. When left a widower he bade the
Empress-dowager Euphrosyne assemble at her levée
all the most beautiful of the daughters of the East-Roman
aristocracy, and came among them to choose
a wife, carrying like Paris a golden apple in his hand.
His glance was first fixed on the fair Eikasia, but
approaching her he found no better topic to commence
a conversation than the awkward statement that
<q>most of the evil had come into the world by means
of women.</q> The lady retorted that surely most of
the good had also come into the world by their means,
a reply which apparently discomposed Theophilus,
for he walked on and without a further word gave the
golden apple to Theodora, a rival beauty. The choice
was hasty and unhappy, for Theodora was a devoted
Iconodule, and used all her influence against her
husband's religious opinions.
</p>

<p>
Theophilus died in 842, while still a young man,
leaving the throne to his only son Michael, a child of
three years, and the regency to the young empress.
The moment that her husband's grave was closed
Theodora set to work to undo his policy. Amid the
applause of the monks and the populace of Constantinople
<pb n='212'/><anchor id='Pg212'/>
she proclaimed the end of the persecution,
sent for the banished image-worshippers from their
places of exile, and deposed John the Grammarian,
the Iconoclastic patriarch who had served Theophilus.
Within thirty days of the commencement of the new
reign the images had appeared once more on the
walls of all the churches of Constantinople. The
Iconoclasts seem to have been taken by surprise, and
made no resistance to the revolution: however the
empress did not take any measures to persecute them;
it was only power and not security for life and limb
that they lost. The sole permanent result of the
long struggle which they had kept up was a curious
compromise in the Eastern Church on the subject of
representation of the human figure. Statues were
never again erected in places of worship, but only
paintings and mosaics. It was apparently believed
that the actual image savoured too much of the
heathen idol, but that no offence could possibly be
given by the picture, which served as a pious remembrance
of the holy personage it represented, but could
be nothing more. Nevertheless the veneration of the
Byzantines for their holy <q>Eikons</q> became almost as
grotesque as idol-worship, and led to many quaint and
curious forms of superstition.
</p>

<p>
Theodora, engrossed in things religious, handed
over the education of her young son to her brother
Bardas, who became her co-regent and was afterwards
made Caesar. He brought up the young Michael
in the most reckless and unconscientious manner,
teaching him his own vices of drunkenness and
debauchery. Michael was an apt pupil, and ere he
<pb n='213'/><anchor id='Pg213'/>
reached the age of twenty-one had become a confirmed
dipsomaniac. History knows him by the
dishonourable nickname of <q>Michael the Drunkard.</q>
Some years after his majority he grew discontented
with his uncle, and slew him, in order that he might
reign alone. His profligacy and intemperance became
still more unbearable after Bardas was dead,
and had it not been for the splendid organization of
the Byzantine civil service the administration of the
empire must have gone to pieces. Presently Michael
grew tired of spending on state affairs any time that
he could spare from his orgies, and appointed as
Caesar and colleague his boon companion Basil the
Macedonian. Basil had reached the position of
grand chamberlain purely by the Emperor's favour;
he rose from the lowest ranks and is said to have
first entered Michael's service in the humble position
of a groom. His practical ability, combined with a
head hard enough to withstand the effect of even the
longest debauch, won Michael's admiration, and so he
came to be first chamberlain and then Caesar. Under
the mask of a roisterer Basil concealed the most
devouring ambition, and when he knew that his
drunken benefactor had won the contempt of all the
East-Roman world, had the impudence and ingratitude
to plan his murder. Michael was stabbed while
sleeping off the effects of one of his orgies, and his
low-born colleague seized the palace and proclaimed
himself emperor.
</p>

<p>
It might have been expected that the East-Roman
world would have refused to receive as its lord a man
who owed his elevation to the freak of a drunkard,
<pb n='214'/><anchor id='Pg214'/>
and had then become the assassin of his benefactor.
But strangely enough Basil was destined to found the
longest dynasty that ever sat upon the Constantinopolitan
throne. He turned out a far better ruler than
might have been expected from his disgraceful antecedents,
being one of those fortunate men who are
able to utilize the work of others when their own
powers and knowledge fall short.
</p>

<p>
Basil is mainly remembered for his codification of
the laws of the empire, which superseded the <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Ecloga</foreign>
of Leo the Isaurian, even as Leo's compilation had
superseded the more solid and thorough work of
Justinian. The <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Basilika</foreign> of Basil with the additions
made by his son Leo VI. formed the code of the
Byzantine Empire down to its last days, no further
rearrangement being ever made.
</p>

<p>
Basil, being of European birth and not an Asiatic
like the preceding emperors, was naturally an orthodox
image-worshipper. He showed his bigotry by a fierce
persecution of the Paulicians, an Asiatic sect of
heretics accused of Manicheanism, whom the Iconoclast
emperors had been wont to tolerate. Basil's oppression
drove many of them over the Saracen frontier,
where they took refuge with the Moslems and maintained
themselves by plundering the borders of the
empire.
</p>

<p>
Among the other transactions of his nineteen years
of reign [867-886], the only one deserving notice is
the final loss of Sicily. The Saracens of Africa, who
had held a footing in the island ever since the time of
Michael II., now finished their work by storming
Syracuse in 878.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='215'/><anchor id='Pg215'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>XVII. The Literary Emperors And Their Time.
(<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 886-963.)</head>

<p>
The eighty years which followed the death of
Basil the Macedonian were the most uneventful and
monotonous in the whole history of the empire.
They are entirely taken up by the two long reigns
of Leo the Wise and Constantine Porphyrogenitus,<note place='foot'>This name was given him because he was born in the Purple
Chamber, the room in the palace set aside for the Empress. Emperors
born in their father's reign had been scarce of late. Constantine VI. and
Michael the Drunkard were the only two in the 110 years before
Constantine VII.</note>
the son and grandson of the founder of the dynasty.
Basil had been a mere adventurer, an ignorant and
uneducated but capable upstart. His successors&mdash;strange
issue from such a stock&mdash;were a pair of mild,
easy-going, and inoffensive men of literature. They
wrote no annals with their sword, though the times
were not unpropitious for military enterprise, but
devoted themselves to the pen, and have left behind
them some of the most useful and interesting works
in Byzantine literature.
</p>

<p>
If the times had been harder it is doubtful whether
<pb n='216'/><anchor id='Pg216'/>
Leo VI. and Constantine VII. would have been strong
enough to protect their throne. But the period 880-960
was less troubled by foreign wars than any other
corresponding period in the history of the East-Roman
state. The empire of the Caliphs was breaking
up in the East&mdash;the empire of Charles the Great
had already broken up in the West&mdash;the Bulgarians
and other neighbours of the realm on the north were
being converted to Christianity, and settling down into
quiet. The only troubles to which the East-Roman
realm was exposed were piratical raids of the Russians
on the north and the Saracens of Africa on the south.
These were vexatious, but not dangerous. An active
and warlike emperor would probably have found the
time propitious for conquest from his neighbours, but
Leo and Constantine were quiet, unenterprising men,
who dwelt contentedly in the palace, and seldom or
never took the field.
</p>

<p>
Leo's reign of twenty-six years was only diversified
by an unfortunate invasion of Bulgaria, which failed
through the mismanagement of the generals, and for a
great raid of Saracen pirates on Thessalonica in 904.
The capture of the second city of the empire by a fleet
of African adventurers was an incident disgraceful to
the administration of Leo, and caused much outcry
and sensation. But it is fair to say that it was taken
almost by surprise, and stormed from the side of the
sea where no attack had been expected. The armies
and fleet of the empire would have availed to rescue
the town if only its fall had been delayed a few weeks.
When they had taken it the Saracens fled with their
booty, and made no attempt to hold its walls.
</p>

<pb n='217'/><anchor id='Pg217'/>

<p>
Constantine Porphyrogenitus, the offspring of the
fourth wife of Leo the Wise, and the child of his old
age, was only seven when his heritage fell to him.
For many years he was under the tutelage of guardians;
first his father's brother Alexander ruled as his
colleague, and became emperor-regent. Some years
after Alexander had died an ambitious admiral named
Romanus Lecapenus usurped the same position,
declared himself emperor, and administered the
realm. The life of Romanus was protracted into
extreme old age, long after Constantine had reached
his majority; but the ambitious veteran held tight to
the sceptre, and kept the rightful heir in the background.
Constantine consoled himself by writing
books and painting pictures; it was not till he was
nearly forty that he came to his own. Even then his
success was not owing to his own energy; the sons
of the aged Romanus had resolved to succeed their
parent on the throne, in despite of the rights of
Constantine. But when they declared themselves
emperors and made their old father abdicate, an
outburst of popular wrath was provoked. The mob
and the guards joined to sweep away the presumptuous
Stephen Lecapenus and his brother. They were
immured in monasteries, and Constantine emerged from
his seclusion to administer the empire for twenty
years. He was somewhat weak and ineffective, but
neither obstinate nor tyrannical; many abler men
made worse rulers.
</p>

<p>
The chief achievements of both Leo and Constantine
were their books. Those of Leo consist of a
manual on the Art of War, some theological treatises,
<pb n='218'/><anchor id='Pg218'/>
and a book of prophecies, a collection of political
enigmas, which were long the puzzle and admiration
of the East.<note place='foot'>There is a splendid copy of this book in the Bodleian Library, made
as late as 1560, where all the prophecies are applied to the Turks and
Venetians.</note> The first-named work is most valuable
and interesting, bringing down the history of military
organization, tactics, and strategy to Leo's own time,
and giving us a perfect picture of the Byzantine army
and its tactics, as well as incidental sketches of all
the enemies with which it had to contend. The backbone
of the force was still the <q>themes</q> or <q>turmæ</q>
of heavy cavalry, of which every province had one.
The number of the provinces had been much increased
since the days of the emperors of the house of Heraclius,
and this implied a corresponding increase in the troops.
They were raised from subjects of the empire and
officered by the Byzantine nobility, for as Leo
observed, <q>There was no difficulty in obtaining
officers of good birth and private means, whose origin
made them respected by the soldiery, while their
money enabled them to win the good graces of their
men by many gifts of small creature comforts, over
and above their pay.</q> The names of some of the
great noble houses are found for generation after
generation in the imperial muster rolls, such as those
of Ducas, Phocas, Comnenus, Bryennius, Kerkuas,
Diogenes, and many more. The pages of Leo's work
breathe an entire confidence in the power of the army
to deal with any foe; against Saracen, Turk, Hungarian,
and Slav, instant and decisive action is advised;
when caught, they should be fought and beaten. It
<pb n='219'/><anchor id='Pg219'/>
is only when dealing with the men of the West, the
Franks and Lombards, that Leo recommends caution
and deprecates any rash engagement in a general
action, preferring to wear the enemy down by cutting
off his supplies and harassing his marches. We
gather a very favourable impression of the Byzantine
army from Leo's book; it was organized, armed, and
supplied in a manner that has no parallel till modern
times. Each regiment possessed its special uniform,
and was equipped with regularity. There was none
of that variety in arms and organizations which was
the bane of mediæval armies. The regiments had
each attached to them an elaborate military train, a
small body of engineers, and a provision of surgeons
and ambulances. To encourage the saving of wounded
men, Leo tells us that the bearer company was given
a gold piece for every disabled soldier whom it brought
off the field after a lost battle. It would be hard to
find any similar care shown for the wounded till the
days of our own century.
</p>

<p>
The Byzantine fleet, as Leo describes it, had for its
chief object the maintenance of the police of the seas
in the Aegean, Levant, and South Italian waters. Its
enemies were the Saracens of the Syrian and African
coasts, and more especially the troublesome Corsairs
of Crete, who were often beaten but never subdued
till Nicephorus Phocas exterminated them in 961.
The empire maintained three fleets, small ones in the
Black Sea and in Western waters; but the largest in
the Aegean. This was composed of sixty <q>dromonds,</q>
or war-vessels of the largest rating; their great depôt
was in the arsenal at Constantinople, but they could
<pb n='220'/><anchor id='Pg220'/>
also be refitted at Samos, Thessalonica, and several
other ports. Owing to their superior size, and still
more to their employment of the celebrated Greek
fire, the imperial fleets generally had the better of the
Saracen, but though they checked his larger squadrons,
they could never suppress the petty piracy by isolated
sea-robbers, which rendered all mediæval commerce
so dangerous.
</p>

<p>
The works of Constantine Porphyrogenitus are
even more interesting than those of his father. His
treatise called <q>On the Themes</q> is invaluable to
the historian, as it gives a complete list of the
Themes, their boundaries, inhabitants, characteristics,
and resources, with some other incidental notices of
value. Still more important is the book, <q>On the
Administration of the Empire,</q> which contains
directions for the foreign policy of the realm, and
sketches the condition and resources of the various
nations with whom the Constantinopolitan government
had dealings. Constantine also wrote a biography of
his grandfather, Basil the Macedonian, couched in
terms of respect which that hardy usurper was far
from deserving. But his longest and most ambitious
work was on Court Ceremonies, a manual of etiquette
and precedence, describing the official hierarchy of
the empire, its duties and privileges, and containing
elaborate directions for the conduct of state ceremonials
and the interior economy of the royal household.
On this comparatively trifling topic Constantine
spent far more pains than on the works of larger
interest which he composed. His books show him to
have been a man of no great originative faculty, but
<pb n='221'/><anchor id='Pg221'/>
gifted with the powers of a careful and methodical
compiler, who loved details and never shirked trouble.
His care for court pageants was very characteristic of
the peaceful emperor, who had long been kept at
home by his guardian, and forced to compensate
himself by ceremonial for the want of real power.
</p>

<p>
The fact that two successive emperors devoted
themselves to literary work is a sufficient sign that
by the end of the ninth century the times of intellectual
dearth and destitution which had so long
prevailed were now at an end. From the death of
Justinian to the end of the Heraclian dynasty matters
grew gradually worse; from the rise of Leo the
Isaurian onward they began slowly to improve. The
darkest age in Byzantine literary history was from
about 600 to 750, a period in which we have hardly
any contemporary annalists, no poetry save the lost
Heracliad of George of Pisidia, and very little even of
theology. Literature seemed absolutely dead at the
accession of the Isaurians, but the quickening influence
of the reforms of the great Leo seems to have been
felt in that province as in every other. By the end
of the eighth century writers were far more numerous,
though many of them were only anti-Iconoclastic
controversialists, like Theodore Studita. By the ninth
century we can trace the existence of a much larger
literary class, and find a few really first-rate authors,
such as the patriarch Photius (857-69), whose learning
and width of culture was astonishing, and whose
library-catalogue is the envy of modern scholars.
</p>

<p>
Perhaps the most interesting development of
Byzantine literature were the epics, or Romances of
<pb n='222'/><anchor id='Pg222'/>
Chivalry as we feel more inclined to call them, which
were written toward the end of the times of the
Macedonian dynasty. The epic of Digenes Akritas,
a work of the end of the tenth century, celebrating
the praises of a hero who lived in the reigns of
Nicephorus Phocas and John Zimisces [963-80], may
serve as a type of the class. It tells of the adventures
in love and war of Basil Digenes Akritas, warden of
the Cilician Marches, or <q>Clissurarch of Taurus,</q> as
his official title would have run. He was a mighty
hunter, both of bears and of Saracens, put down the
Apelates (or moss-troopers, to use a modern analogy)
who infested the border, and led many a foray into
Syria. He is even credited with the slaying of an
occasional dragon by his admiring bard. But perhaps
the most interesting episode is the story of his elopement
with the fair Eudocia Ducas, daughter of the
general of the Cappadocian theme, whom he carried
off in despite of her father and seven brethren.
Pursued by the irate family, he rode them down one
by one at vantage points in the passes, but spared
their lives, and was reconciled to them at the intercession
of his bride. <q>Digenes Akritas</q> is the best
as well as the earliest of the class which it represents.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/fig-25.png' rend='width: 60%'>
    <head>A Warrior-Saint (St. Leontius).
(<hi rend='italic'>From a Byzantine Fresco.</hi>)
(<hi rend='italic'>From "L'Art Byzantin."  Par Charles Bayet. Paris, Quantin. 1883.</hi>)</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Art followed much the same course as literature in
the period 600-900. It was in a state of decay for the
first century and a half, and the surviving works of
that time are often grotesquely rude. For sheer bad
drawing and bad execution nothing can be worse than
a coin of Constans II. or Constantine V.; a Frankish
or Visigoth piece could not be much more unsightly.
<pb n='224'/><anchor id='Pg224'/>
The few manuscripts which survive from that period
display a corresponding, though not an equally great,
decline in art. Mosaic work perhaps showed less
decline than other branches of the decoration, but
even here seventh and eighth century work is very
rare.
</p>

<p>
In the ninth century everything improves wonderfully.
It is most astonishing to see how the old
classical tradition of painting revive in the best
manuscript illumination of the period; many of them
might have been executed in the fifth or even the
fourth century, so closely do they reproduce the old
Roman style. It seems that the Iconoclastic controversy
stimulated painting; persecuted by the
emperors, the art of sacred portraiture became respected
above all others by the multitude. Several
of the most prominent <q>Iconodule</q> martyrs were
painters, of whom it is recorded that their works were
no less beautiful than edifying: those of Lazarus,
whom the Emperor Theophilus tortured, are especially
cited as triumphs of art as well as sanctity.
</p>

<p>
Though a persecutor of painters, Theophilus
deserves a word of mention as the first great builder
since Justinian, and as a patron of the minor arts of
jewellery, silver work, and mosaic. There is good
evidence that these were all in a very flourishing
condition in his time. [829-42.]
</p>

<p>
There is one more point in the history of the empire
in the ninth century to which attention must be called.
This is the unique commercial importance of Constantinople
during this and the two succeeding
centuries. All other commerce than that of the
<pb n='225'/><anchor id='Pg225'/>
empire had been swept off the seas by the Saracen
pirates in the preceding hundred years, and the only
touch between Eastern and Western Christendom was
kept up under the protection of the imperial navy.
The Eastern products which found their way to Italy
or France were all passed through the warehouses of
the Bosphorus. It was East-Roman ships that
carried all the trade; save a few Italian ports, such as
Amalphi and the new city of Venice, no place seems
even to have possessed merchant ships. This monopoly
of the commerce of Europe was one of the
greatest elements in the strength of the empire. So
much money and goods passed through it that a
rather harsh and unwise system of taxation did no
permanent harm.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='226'/><anchor id='Pg226'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>XVIII. Military Glory.</head>

<p>
While Constantine Porphyrogenitus had been
dragging out the monotonous years of his long reign,
events which completely changed the aspect of affairs
in the Moslem East had been following each other
in quick succession on the Asiatic frontier of his
realm. Ever since it first came into existence the
Byzantine Empire had been faced in Asia by a
single powerful enemy; first by the Sassanian
kingdom of Persia, then by the Caliphate under the
two dynasties of the Ommeyades and the Abbasides.
Now, however, the Caliphate had at last broken
up, and the descendants of Abdallah-es-Saffah and
Haroun-al-Raschid had become the vassals of a
rebellious subject, and preserved a mere nominal
sovereignty which did not extend beyond the walls
of their palace in Bagdad.
</p>

<p>
The crisis had come in 951 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>, when the armies of
the Buhawid prince Imad-ud-din, who had seized on
the sovereignty of Persia, broke into Bagdad and
made the Caliph a prisoner in his own royal residence.
For the future the Caliphs were no more
<pb n='227'/><anchor id='Pg227'/>
than puppets, and the Buhawid rulers used their
names as a mere form and pretence. But the conquerors
did not gain possession of the whole of the
Caliphate; only Persia and the Lower Euphrates
Valley obeyed them. Other dynasties rose and
fought for the more western provinces of the old
Moslem realm. The Emirs of Aleppo and Mosul,
who ruled respectively in North Syria and in Mesopotamia,
became the immediate neighbours of the
East-Roman Empire, while the lands beyond them,
Egypt and South Syria, formed the dominions of the
house of the Ikshides.
</p>

<p>
Thus the Byzantines found on their eastern frontier
no longer one great centralized power, but the comparatively
weak Emirates of Aleppo and Mosul, with
the Buhawid and Ikshidite kingdoms in their rear.
The four Moslem states were all new and precarious
creations of the sword, and were generally at war
with each other. An unparalleled opportunity had
arrived for the empire to take its revenge on its
ancient enemies and to move back the Mahometan
boundaries from the line along the Taurus where they
had so long been fixed.
</p>

<p>
Fortunately it was not only the hour that had
arrived, but also the man. The empire had at its
disposal at this moment the best soldier that it had
possessed since the death of Leo the Isaurian.
Nicephorus Phocas was the head of one of those great
landholding families of Asia Minor who formed the
flower of the Byzantine aristocracy; he owned broad
lands in Cappadocia, along the Mahometan frontier.
His father and grandfather before him had been distinguished
<pb n='228'/><anchor id='Pg228'/>
officers, for the whole race lived by the
sword, but Nicephorus far surpassed them. He was
not only a practical soldier, but a military author:
his book, Περὶ Παραδρόμης πολέμου, dealing with the
organization of armies, still survives to testify to his
capacity.
</p>

<p>
It was on Nicephorus then that Romanus II., the
son and heir of Constantine VII., fixed his choice,
when he resolved to commence an attack on the Mahometan
powers. The point selected for assault was
the island of Crete, the dangerous haunt of Corsairs
which lay across the mouth of the Aegean, and sheltered
the pestilent galleys that preyed on the trade of
the empire with the West. Several expeditions against
it had failed during the last half-century, but this one
was fitted out on the largest scale. The vessels are
said to have been numbered by the thousand, and the
land force was chosen from the flower of the Asiatic
<q>themes.</q> Complete success followed the arms of
Nicephorus. He drove the Saracens into their
chief town Chandax (Candia), stormed that city, and
took an enormous booty&mdash;the hoarded wealth of a
century of piracy. The whole island then submitted,
and Nicephorus sailed back to Constantinople to
present to his sovereign, in bonds, Kurup the captive
Emir of Crete, and all the best of the booty of the
island [961 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>].
</p>

<p>
Nicephorus was duly honoured for his feat of arms,
and given command of an army destined to open a
campaign in the next year against the great frontier
strongholds of the Saracens in Asia Minor. Descending
by the passes of the Central Taurus into
<pb n='229'/><anchor id='Pg229'/>
Cilicia, Phocas stormed Anazarbus, and then forced
Mount Amanus, and marched into Northern Syria.
There he took the great town of Hierapolis, and laid
siege to Aleppo, the capital of the Emir Seyf-ud-dowleh,
who ruled from Mount Lebanon to the
Euphrates. The Emir was routed, the walls of his
capital were stormed, and Aleppo, with all its wealth,
fell into the hands of the Byzantine general. But the
citadel still held out, and its protracted resistance
gave time for the Moslems of South Syria and Mesopotamia
to combine for the relief of their northern
compatriots. So great an army appeared before the
walls of Aleppo that Phocas determined not to risk a
battle, and retreated with his booty and his numerous
prisoners into the defiles of Taurus [962 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]. Sixty
captured forts and castles in Cilicia and North Syria
were the permanent fruits of his campaign.
</p>

<p>
The next year the emperor Romanus II. died, very
unexpectedly, ere he had reached his twenty-sixth
year. He left a young wife, and two little boys,
Basil, aged seven, and Constantine, who was only
two. There followed the form of regency that
custom had made usual. Nicephorus, the most
powerful and popular subject of the empire, claimed
the guardianship of the two young Caesars, and had
himself crowned as their colleague. To secure his
place he married their mother, the young and
beautiful empress-dowager Theophano.
</p>

<p>
The joint reign of Nicephorus Phocas and his
wards, Basil II. and Constantine VIII. lasted six
years, 963-969. The regent behaved with scrupulous
loyalty to the young princes, and made no attempt to
<pb n='230'/><anchor id='Pg230'/>
encroach on their rights, or to supplant them by any
of his numerous nephews, who had looked forward to
his accession as likely to lead to their own promotion
to imperial power.
</p>

<p>
Nicephorus was an indefatigable soldier, and spent
more of his reign in the field than in the palace. His
end in life was to complete, as emperor, the conquest
of Cilicia and North Syria, which he had commenced
as general. The years 964 and 965 were spent in
achieving the former object: three long sieges made
him master of the great Cilician frontier fortresses,
Adana, Mopsuestia, and Tarsus. Their rich bronze
gates were sent as trophies to Constantinople, and set
up again in the archways of the imperial palace. A
few months later the tale of victories was completed
by the news that Cyprus also had fallen back into
Byzantine hands, after having passed seventy-seven
years in the power of the Saracens.
</p>

<p>
For two years after this Phocas was employed at
home, where his administration was less popular than
in the camp. The stern old soldier was not a friend
of either priests or courtiers. He had several quarrels
with the patriarch Polyeuctus, which made him detested
by the clergy, and in his public life he displayed
a dislike for pomp and ceremony which led the
Byzantine populace to style him a niggard and an
extortioner. He suppressed shows and sports, and
turned all the public revenues into the war budget,
which lay nearest his heart. When he left the city in
968 for a new campaign against the Saracens, he was
a much less popular ruler than when he had entered
it in triumph in 966 after the conquest of Cilicia.
</p>

<pb n='231'/><anchor id='Pg231'/>

<p>
In the camp, however, Nicephorus was as well loved
and as successful as ever. His last Syrian expedition
was no less glorious than his earlier campaign in the
same quarter six years before. All the North Syrian
cities fell into his hands&mdash;Emesa, Hierapolis, Laodicea,
and with them Aleppo, the residence of the Emir:
Damascus bought off the invader by a great tribute.
Only Antioch, the ancient capital of the land, held
out, and Antioch also was taken in the winter by
escalade, through the daring of an officer named
Burtzes. The story of its fall is curious. The Emperor
had left a blockading army before it under a
general named Peter, with orders not to risk an assault.
Burtzes, the second in command, disobeyed orders
and stormed a corner tower on a snowy night at the
head of a small band of 300 men. Peter, in fear of
the Emperor's orders, refused to send him aid, and for
more than two days Burtzes maintained himself
unaided in the tower he had won. At last, however,
the main body entered, and the Saracens fled from
the town. Nicephorus dismissed both his generals
from the service&mdash;Burtzes for having acted against
orders, Peter for having obeyed them too slavishly, and
allowing an important advantage to be imperilled.
</p>

<p>
Nicephorus returned to Constantinople in the
following year, to meet his death at the hands of those
who should have been his nearest and dearest. His
wife, Theophano had learnt to hate her grim and
stern husband, who, though he possessed all the
virtues, displayed none of the graces. She had cast
her eyes in love on the Emperor's favourite nephew,
John Zimisces, a young cavalry officer, who had
<pb n='232'/><anchor id='Pg232'/>
greatly distinguished himself in the Syrian war.
Zimisces listened to her tempting, but he was not
swayed by lust, but by ambition: he had hoped that
his uncle would make him heir to the throne, to the
detriment of the young emperor Basil. The loyal
old soldier had no idea of wronging his wards, and
his nephew resolved to gain by murder what he could
not gain by favour.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/fig-26.png' rend='width: 80%'>
    <head>Return Of A Victorious Emperor.
(<hi rend='italic'>From an Embroidered Robe.</hi>)
(<hi rend='italic'>From "L'art Byzantin." Par Charles Bayet. Paris, Quantin, 1883.</hi>)</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
So John and Theophano conspired against their
best friend, and basely murdered him in the palace
<pb n='233'/><anchor id='Pg233'/>
one December night in 969. The Emperor was
awakened from sleep to find a dozen of the assassins
forcing his door. John threw him to the ground, and
the others stabbed him, while he cried in his death-agony,
<q>Oh, God! grant me Thy mercy!</q>
</p>

<p>
Thus ended the brave and virtuous Nicephorus
Phocas. His murderers succeeded in their end, for
John Zimisces was able to seduce the guards, overawe
the ministers, and force the patriarch to crown
him emperor. He showed some contrition for the base
slaughter of his uncle, giving away half his private
fortune to found hospitals for lepers, and the other
half to be distributed among the poor of the city.
He did not wed the partner of his guilt, the empress
Theophano, but refused to see her face, and ultimately
sent her to a monastery.
</p>

<p>
If the manner of his accession could but be forgiven
John might pass for a favourable specimen of an
emperor. He respected the rights of the young
emperors Basil and Constantine as scrupulously as his
uncle had done, and proved that as an administrator
and a soldier he was not unworthy to sit in the seat of
Phocas. But the Nemesis of the murder of his uncle
rested upon him in the shape of a long civil war. His
cousin Bardas Phocas took arms to revenge the death
of the old Nicephorus, and stirred up troubles among
his Cappadocian countrymen for several years, till at
last he was captured and immured in a monastery.
</p>

<p>
The chief feat for which John Zimisces is remembered
is his splendid victory over the Russians, whose great
invasion of the Balkan Peninsula falls within the
limits of his reign. We have not yet had much occasion
<pb n='234'/><anchor id='Pg234'/>
to mention the Russian tribes, who for many centuries
had been dwelling in obscurity and barbarism, by the
waters of the Dnieper and the Duna, in a land of
forest and marsh, far remote from the boundaries of
the empire. Nor should we hear of them now, but
for the fact that their scattered tribes had been of late
unified into a single horde by a power from without, and
urged forward into a career of conquest by a race of ambitious
princes. Into the land of the Russians there had
come some hundred years before the reign of John
Zimisces [862 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>], a Viking band from Sweden,
headed by Rurik, the ancestor of all the princes and
Tzars of Russia. The descendants of these adventurers
from the north had gradually conquered and subdued
all the Slavonic tribes of the great forest-land, and
formed them into a single powerful kingdom. Its
capital lay at Kief on the Dnieper, and it had proved a
formidable neighbour to all the barbarous tribes around.
The Viking blood of the new Russian princes drove
them seaward, and ere many generations had passed
they had forced their way down the Dnieper into the
Euxine, and begun to vex the northern borders of the
Byzantine Empire with raids and ravages like those
which the Danes inflicted on Western Europe. Twice
already, within the tenth century, had large fleets of
light Russia row-boats&mdash;they were copies on a smaller
scale of the Viking ships of the North&mdash;stolen down
from the Dnieper mouth to the shores of Thrace, and
landed their plundering crews within a few miles of
the Bosphorus, for a hurried raid on the rich suburban
provinces. On the first occasion in 907, the Russians
had returned home laden with plunder, but on the
<pb n='235'/><anchor id='Pg235'/>
second, which fell in 941, the Byzantine fleet had
caught them at sea, and revenged the harrying of
Thrace by sinking scores of their light boats, which
could not resist for a moment the impact of the heavy
war-galley urged by its hundred oars.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/fig-27.png' rend='width: 80%'>
    <head>Arabesque Design From A Byzantine MS.
(<hi rend='italic'>From "L'Art Byzantin." Par Charles Bayet. Paris, Quantin, 1883.</hi>)</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
But the attack which John Zimisces had to meet
in 970 was far more formidable than either of those
which had preceded it. Swiatoslaf, king of the
Russians, had come down the Dnieper with no less
than 60,000 men, and had thrown himself on to the
kingdom of Bulgaria, which was at the moment
distracted by civil war. He conquered the whole
country, and soon his marauders were crossing the
Balkans and showing themselves in the plain of Thrace.
They even sacked the considerable town of Philippopolis
before the imperial troops came to its aid. This
roused Zimisces, who had been absent in Asia Minor,
and in the early spring of 971 an imperial army of
30,000 men set out to cross the Balkans and drive
the Russians into the Danube. The struggle which
ensued was one of the most desperate which East-Roman
history records. The Russians all fought on
foot, in great square columns, armed with spear and
axe: they wore mail shirts and peaked helmets, just
like the Normans of Western Europe, to whom their
princes were akin. The shock of their columns was
terrible, and their constancy in standing firm almost
incredible. Against these warriors of the North
Zimisces led the mailed horsemen of the Asiatic
themes, and the bowmen and slingers who were the
flower of the Byzantine infantry. The tale of John's
two great battles with the Russians at Presthlava and
<pb n='237'/><anchor id='Pg237'/>
Silistria reads much like the tale of the battle of
Hastings. In Bulgaria, as in Sussex, the sturdy axeman
long beat off the desperate cavalry charges of
their opponents. But they could not resist the hail
of arrows to which they had no missile weapons to
oppose, and when once the archers had thinned their
ranks, the Byzantine cavalry burst in, and made a
fearful slaughter in the broken phalanx. More fortunate
than Harold Godwineson at the field of Senlac, King
Swiatoslaf escaped with his life and the relics of his
army. But he was beleaguered within the walls of
Silistria, and forced to yield himself, on the terms that
he and his men might take their way homeward, on
swearing never to molest the empire again. The
Russian swore the oath and took a solemn farewell of
Zimisces. The contrast between the two monarchs
struck Leo the Deacon, a chronicler who seems to
have been present at the scene, and caused him to
describe the meeting with some vigour. We learn
how the Emperor, a small alert fair-haired man, sat on
his great war-horse by the river bank, in his golden
armour with his guards about him, while the burly
Viking rowed to meet him in a boat, clad in nothing
but a white shirt, and with his long moustache floating
in the wind. They bade each other adieu, and the
Russian departed, only to fall in battle ere the year
was out, at the hands of the Patzinak Tartars of the
Southern Steppes. Soon after Swiatoslaf's death the
majority of the Russians became Christians, and ere
long ceased to trouble the empire by their raids.
They became faithful adherents of the Eastern Church,
and drew their learning, their civilization, even their
<pb n='239'/><anchor id='Pg239'/>
names and titles from Constantinople. The Tzars
are but Caesars misspelt, and the list of their names&mdash;Michael,
Alexander, Nicholas, John, Peter, Alexis&mdash;sufficiently
witnesses to their Byzantine godparents.
Russian mercenaries were ere long enlisted in the
imperial army, and formed the nucleus of the
<q>Varangian guard,</q> in which at a later day, Danes,
English, and Norsemen of all sorts were incorporated.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/fig-28.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <head>Russian Architecture From Byzantine Model.
(<hi rend='italic'>Church at Vladimir.</hi>)
(<hi rend='italic'>From "L'Art Byzantin." Par Charles Bayet. Paris, Quantin, 1883.</hi>)</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
John Zimisces survived his great victory at Silistria
for five years, and won, ere he died, more territory in
Northern Syria from the Saracens. The border
which his uncle Nicephorus had pushed forward to
Antioch and Aleppo was advanced by him as far as
Amida and Edessa in Mesopotamia. But in the
midst of his conquests Zimisces was cut off by death,
while still in the flower of his age. Report whispered
that he had been poisoned by one of his ministers,
whom he had threatened to displace. But the tale
cannot be verified, and all that is certain is that John
died after a short illness, leaving the throne to his
young ward Basil II., who had now attained the age
of twenty years [976 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>].
</p>

</div>

<pb n='240'/><anchor id='Pg240'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>XIX. The End Of The Macedonian Dynasty.</head>

<p>
Basil II., who now sat in his own right on the
throne which his warlike guardians Nicephorus and
John had so long protected, was by no means unworthy
to succeed them. Unlike his ancestors of the
Macedonian house, he showed from the first a love for
war and adventure. Probably the deeds of John and
Nicephorus excited him to emulation: at any rate
his long reign from 976 till 1025, is one continuous
record of wars, and almost entirely of wars brought
to a successful termination. Basil seemed to have
modelled himself on the elder of his two guardians,
the stern Nicephorus Phocas. His earliest years on
the throne, indeed, were spent in the pursuit of
pleasure, but ere he reached the age of thirty a
sudden transformation was visible in him. He gave
himself up entirely to war and religion: he took a
vow of chastity, and always wore the garb of a monk
under his armour and his imperial robes. His piety
was exaggerated into bigotry and fanaticism, but it
was undoubtedly real, though it did not keep him
from the commission of many deeds of shocking cruelty
<pb n='241'/><anchor id='Pg241'/>
in the course of his wars. His justice was equally
renowned, but it often degenerated into mere harshness
and indifference to suffering. No one could
have been more unlike his gay pleasure-loving father,
or his mild literary grandfather, than the grim emperor
who won from posterity the title of Bulgaroktonos,
<q>the Slayer of the Bulgarians.</q>
</p>

<p>
Basil's life-work was the moving back of the East-Roman
border in the Balkan Peninsula as far as the
Danube, a line which it had not touched since the Slavonic
immigration in the days of Heraclius, three hundred
and fifty years before. In the first years of his
reign, indeed, he accomplished little, being much
harassed by two rebellions of great Asiatic nobles&mdash;Bardas
Phocas, the nephew of Nicephorus II., and
Bardas Skleros, the general of the Armeniac theme.
But after Phocas had died and Skleros had surrendered,
Basil reserved all his energies for war in Europe,
paying comparatively little attention to the Eastern
conquests which had engrossed Nicephorus Phocas
and John Zimisces.
</p>

<p>
The whole interior of the Balkan Peninsula formed
at this period part of the dominions of Samuel King
of the Bulgarians, who reigned over Bulgaria, Servia,
inland Macedonia, and other districts around them.
It was a strong and compact kingdom, administered
by an able man, who had won his way to the throne
by sheer strength and ability, for the old royal house
had ceased out of the land during Swiatoslaf's invasion
of Bulgaria ten years before. The main power of
Samuel lay not in the land between Balkan and
Danube, which gave his kingdom its name, but in the
<pb n='242'/><anchor id='Pg242'/>
Slavonic districts further West and South. The
centre of his realm was the fortress of Ochrida, which
he had chosen as his capital&mdash;a strong town situated
on a lake among the Macedonian hills. There
Samuel mustered his armies, and from thence he
started forth to attach either Thessalonica or Adrianople,
as the opportunity might come to him.
</p>

<p>
The duel between Basil and Samuel lasted no less
than thirty-four years, till the Bulgarian king died
a beaten man in 1014. This long and unremitting
struggle taxed all the energies of the empire, for
Samuel was not a foe to be despised; he was no mere
barbarian, but had learnt the art of war from his
Byzantine neighbours, and had specially studied
fortification. It was the desperate defences of his
numerous hill-castles that made Basil's task such a
long one. The details of the struggle are too long
to follow out: suffice it to say that after some defeats
in his earlier years, Basil accomplished the conquest
of Bulgaria proper, as far as the Danube, in 1002, the
year in which Widdin, the last of Samuel's strongholds
in the North surrendered to him. For twelve years
more the enemy held out in the Central Balkans, in
his Macedonian strongholds, about Ochrida and
Uskup. But at last, Basil's constant victories in the
field, and his relentless slaughter of captives after the
day was won, broke the force of the Bulgarian king.
In 1014 the Emperor gained a crowning victory, after
which he took 15,000 prisoners: he put out the eyes
of all save one man in each hundred, and sent the
poor wretches with their guides to seek King Samuel
in his capital. The old Bulgarian was so overcome
<pb n='243'/><anchor id='Pg243'/>
at the horrible sight that he was seized with a fit, and
died on the spot, of rage and grief. His successors
Gabriel and Ladislas could make no head against the
stern and relentless emperor, and in 1018 the last
fortress of the kingdom of Ochrida surrendered at
discretion. Contrary to his habit, Basil treated the
vanquished foe with mildness, indulged in no massacres,
and contented himself with repairing the old
Roman roads and fortresses of the Central Balkans,
without attempting to exterminate the Slavonic tribes
that had so often defied him. His conquests rounded
off the empire on its northern frontier, and made it
touch the Magyar kingdom of Hungary, for Servia
no less than Bulgaria and Macedonia formed part of
his conquests. The Byzantine border now ran from
Belgrade to the Danube mouth, a line which it was
destined to preserve for nearly two hundred years, till
the great rebellion of Bulgaria against Isaac Angelus
in the year 1086.
</p>

<p>
Having justly earned his grim title of <q>the Slayer
of the Bulgarians</q> by his long series of victories in
Europe, Basil turned in his old age to continue the
work of John Zimisces on the Eastern frontier. There
the Moslem states were still weak and divided; though
a new power, the Fatimite dynasty in Egypt, had
come to the front, and acquired an ascendency over
its neighbours. Basil's last campaigns, in 1021-2, were
directed against the princes of Armenia, and the
Iberians and Abasgians who dwelt beyond them to
the north. His arms were entirely successful, and he
added many Armenian districts to his Eastern
provinces; but it may be questioned whether these
<pb n='244'/><anchor id='Pg244'/>
conquests were beneficial to the empire. A strong
Armenian kingdom was a useful neighbour to the
Byzantine realm; being a Christian state it was
usually friendly to the empire, and acted as a
barrier against Moslem attacks from Persia. Basil
broke up the Armenian power, but did not annex the
whole country, or establish in it any adequate
provision against the ultimate danger of attacks from
the East by the Mahometan powers.
</p>

<p>
Basil died in 1025 at the age of sixty-eight, just as
he was preparing to send forth an expedition to
rescue Sicily from the hands of the Saracens. He had
won more provinces for the empire than any general
since the days of the great Belisarius, and at his death
the Byzantine borders had reached the furthest
extension which they ever knew. His successors
were to be unworthy of his throne, and were destined
to lose provinces with as constant regularity
as he himself had shown in gaining them. There was
to be no one after him who could boast that he had
fought thirty campaigns in the open field with harness
on his back, and had never turned aside from any
enterprise that he had ever taken in hand.
</p>

<p>
Basil's brother Constantine had been his colleague
in name all through the half century of his
reign. No one could have been more unlike the ascetic
and indefatigable <q>Slayer of the Bulgarians.</q> Constantine
was a mere worldling, a man of pleasure, a
votary of the table and the wine cup, whose only
redeeming tastes were a devotion to music and literature.
He had dwelt in his corner of the palace
surrounded by a little court of eunuchs and flatterers,
<pb n='245'/><anchor id='Pg245'/>
and excluded by the stern Basil from all share and
lot in the administration of the empire. Now Constantine
found himself the heir of his childless brother,
and was forced at the age of sixty to take up the
responsibilities of empire. He proved an idle and incompetent,
but not an actively mischievous sovereign.
His worst act was to hand over the administration of
the chief offices of state to six of his old courtiers&mdash;all
eunuchs&mdash;whose elevation was a cause of wild
anger to the great noble families, and whose inexperience
led to much weak and futile government
during his short reign.
</p>

<p>
Constantine died in 1028, after a very brief taste of
empire. He was the last male of the Macedonian
house, and left no heirs save his elderly unmarried
daughters&mdash;whose education and moral training he
had grossly neglected. Zoe, the eldest, was more than
forty years of age, but her father had never found her
a husband. On his death-bed, however, he sent for
a middle-aged noble named Romanus Argyrus, and
forced him, at an hour's notice, to wed the princess.
Only two days later Romanus found himself left, by
his father-in-law's death, titular head of the empire.
But Zoe, a clever, obstinate, and unscrupulous woman,
kept the reins of authority in her own hands, and gave
her unwilling spouse many an evil hour. She was
inordinately vain, and pretended, like Queen Elizabeth
of England, to be the mistress of all hearts long
after she was well advanced in middle age. Her
husband let her go her own way, and devoted himself
to such affairs of state as he was allowed to manage.
His interference with warlike matters was most unhappy.
<pb n='246'/><anchor id='Pg246'/>
Venturing a campaign in Syria, he led his
army to defeat, and saw several towns on the border
fall into the hands of the Emir of Aleppo. After a
reign of six years Romanus died of a lingering disease,
and Zoe was left a widow. Almost before the breath
was out of her husband's body, the volatile empress&mdash;she
was now over fifty&mdash;had chosen and wedded
another partner. The new emperor was Michael the
Paphlagonian, a young courtier who had been Gentleman
of the Bedchamber to Romanus: he was twenty-eight
years of age and noted as the most handsome
man in Constantinople. His good looks had won
Zoe's fancy, and to his own surprise he found himself
seated on the throne by his elderly admirer [1034].
</p>

<p>
The object of Zoe's anile affection was a capable
man, and justified his rather humiliating elevation
by good service to the empire. He beat back the
Saracens from Syria and put down a Bulgarian
rebellion with success. But in his last years he saw
Servia, one of the conquests of Basil II., burst out into
revolt, and could not quell it. He also failed in a
project to reconquer Sicily from the Moors, though he
sent against the island George Maniakes, the best
general of the day, who won many towns and defeated
the Moslems in two pitched battles. The attempt to
subdue the whole island failed, and the conquests of
Maniakes were lost one after the other. Michael IV.,
though still a young man, was fearfully afflicted with
epileptic fits, which sapped his health, and so enfeebled
him that he died a hopeless invalid ere he reached the
age of thirty-six. The irrepressible Zoe, now again a
widow, took a few days to decide whether she would
<pb n='247'/><anchor id='Pg247'/>
adopt a son, or marry a third husband. She first
tried the former alternative, and crowned as her
colleague her late spouse's nephew and namesake
Michael V. But the young man proved ungrateful,
and strove to deprive the aged empress of the control
of affairs. When he announced his intention of
removing her from the capital, the city mob, who
loved the Macedonian house, and laughed at rather
than reprobated the foibles of Zoe, took arms to
defend their mistress. In a fierce fight between the
rioters and the guards of Michael V., 3,000 lives
were lost: but the insurgents had the upper hand,
routed the soldiery, and caught and blinded Michael.
</p>

<p>
Zoe, once more at the head of the state, now made
her third marriage, at the age of sixty-two. She
chose as her partner Constantine Monomachus, an
old debauchee who had been her lover thirty years ago.
Their joint reign was unhappy both at home and
abroad. Frequent rebellions broke out both in Asia
Minor and in the Balkan Peninsula. The Patzinaks
sent forays across the Danube, while a new enemy,
the Normans of South Italy, conquered the <q>theme
of Langobardia,</q> the last Byzantine possession to the
West of the Adriatic, and established in its stead the
duchy of Apulia [1055]. A still more dangerous foe
began also to be heard of along the Eastern frontier.
The Seljouk Turks were now commencing a career of
conquest in Persia and the lands on the Oxus. In
1048 the advance guard of their hordes began to
ravage the Armenian frontier of the empire. But
this danger was not yet a pressing one.
</p>

<p>
When Zoe and Constantine IX. were dead, the
<pb n='248'/><anchor id='Pg248'/>
sole remaining scion of the Macedonian house was
saluted as ruler of the empire. This was Theodora,
the younger sister of Zoe, an old woman of seventy,
who had spent the best part of her days in a nunnery.
She was as sour and ascetic as her sister had been
vain and amorous; but she does not seem to have
been the worst of the rulers of Byzantium, and her
two years of power were not troubled by rebellions or
vexed by foreign war. Her austere virtues won her
some respect from the people, and the fact that she
was the last of her house, and that with its extinction
the troubles of a disputed succession were doomed to
come upon the empire, seems to have sobered her
subjects, and led them to let the last days of the
Basilian dynasty pass away in peace.
</p>

<p>
Theodora died on the 30th of August, 1057, having
on her death-bed declared that she adopted Michael
Stratioticus as her successor. Then commenced the
reign of trouble, the <q>third anarchy</q> in the history of
the Byzantine Empire.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='249'/><anchor id='Pg249'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>XX. Manzikert. (1057-1081.)</head>

<p>
The moment that the last of the Macedonian
dynasty was gone, the elements of discord seemed
unchained, and the double scourge of civil war and
foreign invasion began to afflict the empire. In the
twenty-four years between 1057 and 1081 were
pressed more disasters than had been seen in any
other period of East-Roman history, save perhaps the
reign of Heraclius. For now came the second cutting-short
of the empire, the blow that was destined to
shear away half its strength, and leave it maimed
beyond any possibility of ultimate recovery.
</p>

<p>
Domestic troubles were the first inevitable consequence
of the extinction of the Macedonian dynasty.
The aged Theodora had named as her successor on
the throne Michael Stratioticus, a contemporary of
her own who had been an able soldier twenty-five
years back. But Michael VI. was grown aged and
incompetent, and the empire was full of ambitious
generals, who would not tolerate a dotard on the
<pb n='250'/><anchor id='Pg250'/>
throne. Before a year had passed a band of great
Asiatic nobles entered into a conspiracy to overturn
Michael, and replace him by Isaac Comnenus, the
chief of one of the ancient Cappadocian houses, and
the most popular general of the East.
</p>

<p>
Isaac Comnenus and his friends took arms, and
dispossessed the aged Michael of his throne with little
difficulty. But a curse seemed to rest upon the
usurpation; Isaac was stricken down by disease when
he had been little more than a year on the throne,
and retired to a monastery to die. His crown was
transferred to Constantine Ducas, another Cappadocian
noble, who was supposed to be second only to
Isaac in competence and popularity. Constantine
reigned for seven troubled years, and disappointed all
his supporters, for he proved but a sorry administrator.
His mind was set on nothing but finance, and in the
endeavour to build up again the imperial treasure,
which had been sorely wasted since the death of Basil
II., he neglected all the other departments of state.
To save money he disbanded no inconsiderable
portion of the army, and cut down the pay of the rest.
This was sheer madness, when there was impending
over the empire the most terrible military danger that
had been seen for four centuries. The safety of the
realm was entirely in the hands of its well-paid and
well-disciplined national army, and anything that
impaired the efficiency of the army was fraught with
the deadliest peril.
</p>

<p>
The Seljouk Turks were now drawing near. Pressing
on from the Oxus lands, their hordes had overrun
Persia and extinguished the dynasty of the Buhawides.
<pb n='251'/><anchor id='Pg251'/>
In 1050, they had penetrated to Bagdad, and their
great chief, Togrul Beg, had declared himself <q>defender
of the faith and protector of the Caliph.</q> Armenia
had next been overrun, and those portions of it which
had not been annexed to the empire, and still obeyed
independent princes, had been conquered by 1064.
In that year fell Ani, the ancient Armenian capital,
and the bulwark which protected the Byzantine
Empire from Eastern invasions.
</p>

<p>
The reign of Constantine Ducas was troubled by
countless Seljouk invasions of the Armeniac, Anatolic,
and Cappadocian themes. Sometimes the invaders
were driven back, sometimes they eluded the imperial
troops and escaped with their booty. But whether
successful or unsuccessful, they displayed a reckless
cruelty, far surpassing anything that the Saracens had
ever shown. Wherever they passed they not merely
plundered to right and left, but slew off the whole
population. Meanwhile, Constantine X., with his
reduced army, proved incompetent to hold them back;
all the more so that his operations were distracted by
an invasion of the Uzes, a Tartar tribe from the
Euxine shore, who had burst into Bulgaria.
</p>

<p>
Ducas died in 1067, leaving the throne to his son,
Michael, a boy of fourteen years. The usual result
followed. To secure her son's life and throne, the
Empress-dowager Eudocia took a new husband, and
made him guardian of the young Michael. The new
Emperor-regent was Romanus Diogenes, an Asiatic
noble, whose brilliant courage displayed in the Seljouk
wars had dazzled the world, and caused it to forget
that caution and ability are far more regal virtues than
<pb n='252'/><anchor id='Pg252'/>
headlong valour. Romanus took in hand with the
greatest vigour the task of repelling the Turks, which
his predecessor had so grievously neglected. He led
into the field every man that could be collected from
the European or Asiatic themes, and for three successive
years was incessantly marching and counter-marching
in Armenia, Cappadocia, and Syria, in the
endeavour to hunt down the marauding bands of the
Seljouks.
</p>

<p>
The operations of Romanus were not entirely unsuccessful.
Alp Arslan, the Sultan of the Seljouks,
contented himself at first with dispersing his hordes
in scattered bands, and attacking many points of the
frontier at once. Hence the Emperor was not unfrequently
able to catch and slay off one of the minor
divisions of the Turkish army. But some of them
always contrived to elude him; his heavy cavalry
could not come up with the light Seljouk horse bowmen,
who generally escaped and rode back home by
a long detour, burning and murdering as they went.
Cappadocia was already desolated from end to end,
and the Turkish raids had reached as far as Amorium,
in Phrygia.
</p>

<p>
In 1071 came the final disaster. In pursuing the
Seljouk plunderers, Romanus was drawn far eastward,
to Manzikert, on the Armenian frontier. There he
found himself confronted, not by a flying foe, but by
the whole force of the Seljouk sultanate, with Alp
Arslan himself at its head. Though his army was
harassed by long marches, and though two large
divisions were absent, the Emperor was eager to fight.
The Turks had never before offered him a fair field,
<pb n='254'/><anchor id='Pg254'/>
and he relied implicitly on the power of his cuirassiers
to ride down any number, however great, of the light
Turkish horse.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/fig-29.png' rend='width: 60%'>
    <head>Our Lord Blessing Romanus Diogenes And Eudocia.
(<hi rend='italic'>From an Ivory at Paris.</hi>)
(<hi rend='italic'>From "L'Art Byzantin." Par Charles Bayet. Paris, Quantin, 1883.</hi>)</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
The decisive battle of Manzikert, which it is not too
much to call the turning-point of the whole course of
Byzantine history, was fought in the early summer of
1071. For a long day the Byzantine horsemen
continued to roll back and break through the lines of
Turkish horse bowmen. But fresh hordes kept coming
on, and in the evening the fight was still undecided.
As the night was approaching, Romanus prepared to
draw his troops back to the camp, but an unhappy
misconception of orders broke up the line, and the
Seljouks edged in between the two halves of the army.
Either from treachery or cowardice Andronicus Ducas,
the officer who commanded the reserve, led his men
off without fighting. The Emperor's division was
beset on all sides by the enemy, and broke up in the
dusk. Romanus himself was wounded, thrown from
his horse, and made prisoner. The greater part of his
men were cut to pieces.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/fig-30.png' rend='width: 60%'>
    <head>Nicephorus Botaniates Sitting In State.
(<hi rend='italic'>From a contemporary MS.</hi>)
(<hi rend='italic'>From "L'Art Byzantin." Par Charles Bayet. Paris, Quantin, 1883.</hi>)</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Alp Arslan showed himself more forbearing to his
prisoner than might have been expected. It is true
that Romanus was led after his capture to the tent of
the Sultan, and laid prostrate before him, that, after
the Turkish custom, the conqueror might place his
foot on the neck of his vanquished foe. But after
this humiliating ceremony the Emperor was treated
with kindness, and allowed after some months to
ransom himself and return home. He would have
fared better, however, if he had remained the prisoner
of the Turk. During his captivity the conduct of
<pb n='255'/><anchor id='Pg255'/>
affairs had fallen into the hands of John Ducas, uncle
of the young emperor Michael. The unscrupulous
regent was determined that Romanus should not
supersede him and mount the throne again. When
the released captive reappeared, John had him seized
<pb n='256'/><anchor id='Pg256'/>
and blinded. The cruel work was so roughly done
that the unfortunate Romanus died a few days later.
</p>

<p>
After this fearful disaster Asia Minor was lost;
there was no chief to take the place of Romanus, and
the Seljouk hordes spread westward almost unopposed.
The next ten years were a time of chaos and
disaster. While the Seljouks were carving their way
deeper and deeper into the vitals of the empire, the
wrecks of the Byzantine army were employed not in
resisting them, but in carrying on a desperate series of
civil wars. After the death of Romanus, every general
in the empire seemed to think that the time had come
for him to assume the purple buskins and proclaim
himself emperor. History records the names of no
less than six pretenders to the throne during the next
nine years, besides several rebels who took up arms
without assuming the imperial title. The young
emperor, Michael Ducas, proved, when he came of
age, to be a vicious nonentity; he is remembered in
Byzantine history only by his nickname of Para-pinakes,
the <q>peck-filcher,</q> given him because in a
year of famine he sold the measure of wheat to his
subjects a fourth short of its proper contents. His
name and that of Nicephorus Botaniates, the rebel who
overthrew him, cover in the list of emperors a space
of ten years that would better be represented by a
blank; for the authority of the nominal ruler scarcely
extended beyond the walls of the capital, and the
themes that were not overrun by the Turks were in
the hands of governors who each did what was right
in his own eyes. At last a man of ability worked
himself up to the surface. This was Alexius
<pb n='257'/><anchor id='Pg257'/>
Comnenus, nephew of the emperor Isaac Comnenus,
whose short reign we related in the opening paragraph
of this chapter.
</p>

<p>
Alexius was a man of courage and ability, but he
displayed one of the worst types of Byzantine character.
Indeed, he was the first emperor to whom the
epithet <q>Byzantine,</q> in its common and opprobrious
sense could be applied. He was the most accomplished
liar of his age, and, while winning and defending
the imperial throne, committed enough acts of mean
treachery, and swore enough false oaths to startle
even the courtiers of Constantinople. He could fight
when necessary, but he preferred to win by treason
and perjury. Yet as a ruler he had many virtues,
and it will always be remembered to his credit that
he dragged the empire out of the deepest slough of
degradation and ruin that it had ever sunk into.
Though false, he was not cruel, and seven ex-emperors
and usurpers, living unharmed in Constantinople
under his sceptre, bore witness to the mildness of his
rule. The tale of his reign sufficiently bears witness
to the strange mixture of moral obliquity and
practical ability in his character.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='258'/><anchor id='Pg258'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>XXI. The Comneni And The Crusades.</head>

<p>
Alexius Comnenus found himself, in 1081,
placed in a position almost as difficult and perilous
as that which Leo the Isaurian faced in 716. Like
Leo, he was a usurper without prestige or hereditary
claims, seated on an unsteady throne, and forced to
face imminent danger from the Moslem enemy without,
and from rival adventurers within. It may be
added that the Isaurian, grievously threatened as he
was by the enemy from the East, had no peril impending
from the West. Alexius had to face at one
and the same time the assault of the Seljouks on
Asia Minor, and the attack of a new and formidable
foe in his western provinces. We have already
mentioned the manner in which the Byzantine
dominion in Italy had come to an end. Now the
same Norman adventurers who had stripped the
empire of Calabria and Apulia were preparing to
cross the straits of Otranto, and seek out the Emperor
in the central provinces of his realm. The forces of
the Italian and Sicilian Normans were united under
<pb n='259'/><anchor id='Pg259'/>
their great chief Robert Guiscard, the hardy and unscrupulous
Duke of Apulia. Just ten years before he
had captured Bari, the last Byzantine fortress on his
own side of the straits; now he was resolved to take
advantage of the anarchy which had prevailed in the
empire ever since the day of Manzikert, and to build
up new Norman principalities to the east of the
Adriatic. There seemed to be nothing presumptuous
in the scheme to those who remembered how a few
hundred Norman adventurers had conquered all
Southern Italy and Sicily, and swelled into a victorious
army fifty thousand strong. Nor could the
invaders fail to remember how, but fifteen years
before, another Norman duke had crossed another
strait in the far West, and won by his strong right
hand the great kingdom of England. Alexius Comnenus
sat like Harold Godwinson on a lately-acquired
and unsteady throne, and Duke Robert thought to
deal with him much as Duke William had dealt with
the Englishman.
</p>

<p>
In June, 1081, the Normans landed, thirty thousand
strong, and laid siege to Durazzo, the maritime
fortress that guarded the Epirot coast. The Emperor
at once flew to its succour. Always active, hopeful,
and versatile, he trusted that he might be able to beat
off the new invaders, whose military worth he was far
from appreciating at its true value. He patched up
a hasty pacification with Suleiman, Sultan of the
Seljouks, by surrendering to him all the territory of
which the Turk was in actual possession, a tract
which now extended as far as the waters of the
Propontis, and actually included the city of Nicaea,
<pb n='260'/><anchor id='Pg260'/>
close to the Bithynian shore, and only seventy miles
from Constantinople.
</p>

<p>
The army with which Alexius had to face the
Normans was the mere wreck and shadow of that
which Romanus IV. had led against the Turks ten
years before. The military organization of the empire
had gone to pieces, and we no longer hear of the old
<q>Themes</q> of heavy cavalry which had formed its
backbone. The new army contained quite a small
proportion of national troops. Its core was the imperial
guard of Varangians&mdash;the Russian, Danish, and
English mercenaries, whose courage had won the
confidence of so many emperors. With them marched
many Turkish, Frankish, Servian, and South-Slavonic
auxiliaries; the native element comprised the regulars
of the three provinces of Thrace, Macedonia, and
Thessaly, all that now remained in Alexius' hands of
the ancient East-Roman realm.
</p>

<p>
Alexius brought Robert Guiscard to battle in front
of Durazzo, and suffered a crushing defeat at his
hands. The Emperor's bad tactics were the main
cause of his failure: his army came upon the ground in
successive detachments, and the van was cut to pieces
before the main body had reached the field. The
brunt of the battle was borne by the Varangians:
carried away by their fiery courage, they charged the
Normans before the rest of Alexius's troops had
formed their line of battle. Rushing on the wing of
Robert's army, commanded by the Count of Bari,
they drove it horse and foot into the sea. Their
success, however, disordered their ranks, and the
Norman duke was able to turn his whole force
<pb n='261'/><anchor id='Pg261'/>
against them ere the Emperor was near enough to
give them aid. A fierce cavalry charge cut off the
greater part of the Varangians; the rest collected on
a mound by the sea-shore, and for some time beat off
the Normans with their axes, as King Harold's men
had done at Senlac on the last occasion when English
and Norman had met. But Robert shot them down
with his archers, and then sent more cavalry against
them. They fell, save a small remnant who defended
themselves in a ruined chapel, which Guiscard had
finally to burn before he could make an end of its
obstinate defenders.
</p>

<p>
The rest of Alexius's army only came into action
when the Varangians had been destroyed. It was
cowed by the loss of its best corps, fought badly, and
fled in haste. Alexius himself, who lingered last
upon the field, was surrounded, and only escaped by
the speed of his horse and the strength of his sword-arm.
Durazzo fell, and in the next year the Normans
overran all Epirus and descended into Thessaly.
Alexius risked two more engagements with them,
but his inexperienced troops were defeated in both.
Disaster taught him to avoid pitched battles, and at
last, in 1083, after a more cautious campaign, his
patience was rewarded by the dispersion of the
Norman army. Catching it while divided, the
Emperor inflicted on it a severe defeat at Larissa,
and forced it back into Epirus. After this the war
slackened, and when Robert Guiscard died in 1085
the Norman danger passed away.
</p>

<p>
Thus one foe was removed, but Alexius was not
destined to win peace. Constant rebellions at home,
<pb n='262'/><anchor id='Pg262'/>
and wars with the Patzinaks, the Slavs, and the
Seljouks filled the next ten years. Alexius, however,
was never discouraged: <q>eking out the lion's skin
with the fox's hide,</q> he fought and intrigued, lied and
negotiated, and at the end of the time had held his
own and lost no more territory, while his throne was
growing more secure.
</p>

<p>
But in the fifteenth year of his reign a new cloud
began to arise in the west, which was destined to
exercise unsuspected influence, both for good and evil,
on the empire. The Crusades were on the eve of their
commencement. Ever since the Seljouks had taken
Jerusalem in 1075, four years after Manzikert, the
western pilgrims to the Holy Land had been suffering
grievous things at the hands of the barbarians.
But all the wrath that their ill-treatment provoked
would have been fruitless, if the way to Syria had
not been opened of late to the nations of Western
Christendom. Two series of events had made free
communication between East and West possible in the
end of the eleventh century, in a measure which had
never before been seen.
</p>

<p>
The first of these was the conversion of Hungary,
begun by St. Stephen in 1000, and completed about
1050. For the future there lay between the Byzantine
Empire and Germany not a barbarous pagan
state, but a semi-civilized Christian kingdom, which
had taken its place among the other nations of the
Roman Catholic faith. Communication down the
Danube, between Vienna and the Byzantine outposts
in Bulgaria, became for the first time possible, and ere
long the route grew popular. The second phenomenon
<pb n='263'/><anchor id='Pg263'/>
which made the Crusades possible was the
destruction of the Saracen naval power in the Central
Mediterranean. This was carried out first by the
Pisans and Genoese, whose fleets conquered Corsica
and Sardinia from the Moslems, and then by the
Normans, whose occupation of Sicily made the
voyage from Marseilles and Genoa to the East safe
and sure. Four new maritime powers&mdash;the Genoese,
Pisans, and Normans in the open sea, and the
Venetians in the Adriatic&mdash;had developed themselves
into importance, and now their fleets swept the
waters where no Christian war-galleys save those of
Byzantium, had ever been seen before.
</p>

<p>
It was the fact that free access to the East was now
to be gained, both by land and sea, as it had never
been before, that made the Crusades feasible. Of the
preaching of Peter the Hermit and the efforts of
Pope Urban we need not speak. Suffice it to say,
that in 1095 news came to the Emperor Alexius that
the nations of the West were mustering by myriads,
and directing their march towards his frontiers, with
the expressed intention of driving the Moslems from
Palestine. The Emperor had little confidence in the
purity of the zeal of the Crusaders; his wily mind
could not comprehend their enthusiasm, and he
dreaded that some unforeseen circumstance might
turn their arms against himself. When the hordes
of armed Frankish pilgrims began to arrive, his fears
were justified: the new-comers pillaged his country
right and left upon their way, and were drawn into
many bloody fights with the peasantry and the imperial
garrisons, which might have ended in open
<pb n='264'/><anchor id='Pg264'/>
war. But Alexius set himself to work to smooth
matters down; all his tact and patience were needed,
and there was ample scope for his talent for intrigue
and insincere diplomacy. He had resolved to induce
the crusading chiefs to do him homage, and to swear
to restore to him all the old dominions of the empire
which they might reconquer from the Turks. After
long and tedious negotiations he had his way: the
leaders of the Crusade, from Godfrey of Bouillon and
Hugh of Vermandois down to the smallest barons,
were induced to swear him allegiance. Some he
flattered, others he bribed, others he strove to frighten
into compliance. The pages of the history written
by his daughter, Anna Comnena, who regarded his
powers of cajolery with greater respect than any other
part of his character, are full of tales of the ingenious
shifts by which he brought the stupid and arrogant
Franks to reason. At length they went on their way,
with Alexius's gold in their pockets, and encouraged
by his promise that he would aid them with his troops,
continue to supply them with provisions, and never
abandon them till the Holy City was reconquered.
</p>

<p>
In the spring of 1097 the Crusaders began to cross
the Bosphorus, and in two marches found themselves
within Turkish territory. They at once laid siege to
Nicaea, the frontier fortress of the Seljouk Sultan.
Encompassed by so great a host the Turkish garrison
soon lost heart and surrendered, not to the Franks,
but to Alexius, whose troops they secretly admitted
within the walls. This nearly led to strife between
the Emperor and the Crusaders, who had been
reckoning on the plunder of the town; but Alexius
<pb n='265'/><anchor id='Pg265'/>
appeased them with further stores of money, and the
pilgrim host rolled forward once more into the interior
of Asia Minor.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/fig-31.png' rend='width: 60%'>
    <head>Byzantine Ivory-Carving Of The Twelfth Century.
(<hi rend='italic'>From the British Museum.</hi>)
(<hi rend='italic'>From "L'Art Byzantin." Par Charles Bayet. Paris, Quantin, 1883.</hi>)</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
In 1097 the Crusaders forced their way through
Phrygia and Cappadocia, beating back the Seljouks
at every encounter, till they reached North Syria,
where they laid siege to Antioch. Alexius had undertaken
to help them in their campaign, but he was
set on playing an easier game. When they were
crushing the Turks he followed in their rear at a safe
distance, like the jackal behind the lion, picking up
the spoil which they left. While the Sultan was
engaged with them Alexius despoiled him of Smyrna,
Ephesus, and Sardis, reconquering Western Asia
Minor almost without a blow, since the Seljouk hordes
were drawn away eastward. It was the same in the
next year; when the Crusaders were fighting hard
round Antioch against the princes of Mesopotamia,
and sent to ask for instant help, Alexius despatched
no troops to Syria, but gathered in a number of
Lydian and Phrygian fortresses which lay nearer to
his hand. Hence there resulted a bitter quarrel
between the Emperor and the Franks, for since he
gave them no help they refused to hand over to him
Antioch and their other Syrian conquests. Each
party, in fact, broke the compact signed at Constantinople,
and accused the other of treachery. Hence
it resulted that the Crusade ended not in the re-establishment
of the Byzantine power in Syria, but in
the foundation of new Frankish states, the principalities
of Edessa, Antioch, and Tripoli, and the more
important kingdom of Jerusalem.
</p>

<pb n='267'/><anchor id='Pg267'/>

<p>
That he did not recover Syria was no real loss to
Alexius; he would not have been strong enough to
hold it, had it been handed over to him. The actual
profit which he made by the Crusade was enough to
content him: the Franks had rolled back the Turkish
frontier in Asia not less than two hundred miles:
instead of the Seljouk lying at Nicaea, he was now
chased back behind the Bithynian hills, and the
empire had recovered all Lydia and Caria with
much of the Phrygian inland. The Seljouks were
hard hit, and for well-nigh a century were reduced to
fight on the defensive.
</p>

<p>
Owing, then, to the fearful blow inflicted by the
Crusades on the Moslem powers of Asia Minor and
Syria, the later years of Alexius were free from the
danger which had overshadowed the beginning of his
reign. He was able, between 1100 and 1118, to
strengthen his position at home and abroad; the
constant rebellions which had vexed his early years
ceased, and when the Normans, under Bohemund of
Tarentum, tried to repeat, in 1107, the feats which
Robert Guiscard had accomplished in 1082, they were
beaten off with ease, and forced to conclude a
disadvantageous peace.
</p>

<p>
The reign of Alexius might have been counted a
period of success and prosperity if it had not been for
two considerations. The first was the rapid decline
of Constantinople as a commercial centre, which was
brought about by the Crusades. When the Genoese
and Venetians succeeded in establishing themselves
in the seaports of Syria, they began to visit Constantinople
far less than before. It paid them much
<pb n='268'/><anchor id='Pg268'/>
better to conduct their business at Acre or Tyre than
on the Bosphorus. The king of Jerusalem, the
weakest of feudal sovereigns, could be more easily
bullied and defrauded than the powerful ruler of
Constantinople. In his own seaports he possessed
hardly a shadow of authority: the Italians traded
there on such conditions as they chose. Hence the
commerce of the West with Persia, Egypt, Syria, and
India, ceased to pass through the Bosphorus. Genoa
and Venice became the marts at which France, Italy,
and Germany, sought their Eastern goods. It is
probable that the trade of Constantinople fell off by
a third or even a half in the fifty years that followed
the first Crusade. The effect of this decline on the
coffers of the state was deplorable, for it was ultimately
on its commercial wealth that the Byzantine
state based its prosperity. All through the reigns of
Alexius and his two successors the complaints about
the rapid fall in the imperial revenue grew more and
more noticeable.
</p>

<p>
This dangerous decay in the finances of the empire
was rendered still more fatal by the political devices
of Alexius, who began to bestow excessive commercial
privileges to the Italian republics, in return for their
aid in war. This system commenced in 1081, when
the Emperor, then in the full stress of his first Norman
war, granted the Venetians the free access to
most of the ports of his empire without the payment
of any customs dues. To give to foreigners a boon
denied to his own subjects was the height of economic
lunacy; the native merchants complained that
the Venetians were enabled to undersell them in every
<pb n='269'/><anchor id='Pg269'/>
market, owing to this exemption from import and
export duties. Matters were made yet worse in 1111,
when Alexius bestowed a similar, though less extensive,
grant of immunities on the Pisans.
</p>

<p>
When John II., the son of Alexius, succeeded in
1118 to the empire which his father had saved, the
fabric was less strong than it appeared to the outward
eye. Territorial extension seemed to imply increased
strength, and the rapid falling off in the financial
resources of the realm attracted little attention. John
however was one of those prudent and economical
princes who stave off for years the inevitable day of
distress. Of all the rulers who ever sat upon the
Byzantine throne, he is the only one of whom no
detractor has ever said an evil word. When we remember
that he was his father's son, it is astonishing
to find that his honesty and good faith were no less
notable than his courage and generosity. His subjects
named him <q>John the Good,</q> and their appreciation
of his virtues was sufficiently marked by the
fact that no single rebellion<note place='foot'>There were two palace intrigues against him, both headed by members
of his own family. Neither of them won any support from people
or army.</note> marred the internal
peace of his long reign. [1118-1143.]
</p>

<p>
John was a good soldier, and during his rule the
frontier of the empire in Asia continued to advance,
at the expense of the Turks. But his strategy would
seem to have been at fault since he preferred to
reconquer the coast districts of Northern and Southern
Asia Minor, rather than to strike at the heart of the
Seljouk power on the central table-land. When he
<pb n='270'/><anchor id='Pg270'/>
had reduced all Cilicia, Pisidia, and Pontus, his
dominions became a narrow fringe of coast, surrounding
on three sides the realm of the Sultan, who still
retained all the Cappadocian and Lycaonian plateau.
It should then have been John's task to finish the
reconquest of Asia Minor, but he preferred to plunge
into Syria, where he forced the Frank prince of
Antioch and the Turkish Emir of Aleppo to pay him
tribute, but left no permanent monument of his conquests.
He was preparing a formidable expedition
against the Franks of the kingdom of Jerusalem,
when he perished by accident while on a hunting
expedition.<note place='foot'>He pierced himself by misadventure with one of his own poisoned
arrows, and died of the wound.</note>
</p>

<p>
John the Good was succeeded by his son Manuel,
whose strength and weakness combined to give a
deathblow to the empire. Manuel was a mere knight-errant,
who loved fighting for fighting's sake, and
allowed his passion for excitement and adventure to
<pb n='271'/><anchor id='Pg271'/>
be his only guide. His whole reign was one long
series of wars, entered into and abandoned with equal
levity. Yet for the most part they were successful
wars, for Manuel was a good cavalry officer if he was
but a reckless statesman, and his fiery courage and
untiring energy made him the idol of his troops. At
the head of the veteran squadrons of mercenary horsemen
that formed the backbone of his army, he swept
off the field every enemy that ever dared to face him.
He overran Servia, invaded Hungary, to whose king
he dictated terms of peace, and beat off with success
an invasion of Greece by the Normans of Sicily. His
most desperate struggle, however, was a naval war
with Venice, in which his fleet was successful enough,
and drove the Doge and his galleys out of the
Ægean. But the damage done to the trade of Constantinople
by the Venetian privateers, who swarmed
in the Levant after their main fleet had been chased
away, was so appalling that the Emperor concluded
peace in 1174, restoring to the enemy all the
disastrous commercial privileges which his grandfather
Alexius had granted them eight years before.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/fig-32.png' rend='width: 80%'>
    <head>Hunters. (<hi rend='italic'>From a Byzantine MS.</hi>)
(<hi rend='italic'>From "L'Art Byzantin." Par Charles Bayet, Paris, Quantin, 1883.</hi>)</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
The main fault of Manuel's wars was that they
were conducted in the most reckless disregard of all
financial considerations. With a realm which was
slowly growing poorer, and with a constantly dwindling
revenue, he persisted in piling war on war, and
on devoting every bezant that could be screwed out
of his subjects to the support of the army alone. The
civil service fell into grave disorder, the administration
of justice was impaired, roads and bridges went
to decay, docks and harbours were neglected, while
<pb n='272'/><anchor id='Pg272'/>
the money which should have supported them was
wasted on unprofitable expeditions to Egypt, Syria,
or Italy. So long as the ranks of his mercenaries
were full and their pay forthcoming, the Emperor
cared not how his realm might fare.
</p>

<p>
Of all Manuel's wars only one went ill, but that
was the most important of them all, the one necessary
struggle to which he should have devoted all his
energies. This was the contest with the Seljouks,
which ended in 1176 by a disastrous defeat at Myriokephalon
in Phrygia, brought about by the inexcusable
carelessness of Manuel himself, who allowed
his army to be caught in a defile from which there was
no exit, and routed piecemeal by an enemy who could
have made no stand on the open plains. Manuel
then made peace, and left the Seljouks alone for the
rest of his reign.
</p>

<p>
In 1180 Manuel died, and with him died the good
fortune of the House of Comnenus. His son and
heir, Alexius, was a boy of thirteen, and the inevitable
contest for the regency, which always accompanied
a minority, ensued. After two troubled years Andronicus
Comnenus, a first cousin of the Emperor
Manuel, was proclaimed Caesar, and took over the
guardianship of the young Alexius. Andronicus was
an unscrupulous ruffian, whose past life should have
been sufficient warning against putting any trust in
his professions. He had once attempted to assassinate
Manuel, and twice deserted to the Turks. But
he was a consummate hypocrite, and won his way
to the throne by professions of piety and austere
virtue. No sooner was he seated by the side of
<pb n='273'/><anchor id='Pg273'/>
Alexius II., and felt himself secure, than he seized
and strangled his young relative [1183].
</p>

<p>
But, like our own Richard III., Andronicus found
that the moment of his accession to sole power was
the moment of the commencement of his troubles.
Rebels rose in arms all over the empire to avenge the
murdered Alexius, and the Normans of Sicily seized
the opportunity of invading Macedonia. Conspiracies
were rife in the capital, and the executions which
followed their detection were so numerous and bloody
that a perfect reign of terror set in. The Emperor
plunged into the most reckless cruelty, till men almost
began to believe that his mind was affected. Ere
long the end came. An inoffensive nobleman named
Isaac Angelus, being accused of treason, was arrested
at his own door by the emissaries of the tyrant.
Instead of surrendering himself, Isaac drew his sword
and cut down the official who laid hands on him. A
mob came to his aid, and met no immediate opposition,
for Andronicus was absent from the capital.
The mob swelled into a multitude, the guards would
not fight, and when the Emperor returned in haste,
he was seized and torn to pieces without a sword
being drawn in his cause. Isaac Angelus reigned in
his stead.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='274'/><anchor id='Pg274'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>XXII. The Latin Conquest Of Constantinople.</head>

<p>
The state which had been drained of its resources
by the energetic but wasteful Manuel, and disorganized
by the rash and wicked Andronicus, now passed into
the hands of the two most feeble and despicable
creatures who ever sat upon the imperial throne&mdash;the
brothers Isaac and Alexius Angelus, whose reigns
cover the years 1185-1204.
</p>

<p>
Among all the periods which we have hitherto
described in the tale of the East-Roman Empire,
that covered by the reign of the two wretched Angeli
may be pronounced the most shameful. The peculiar
disgrace of the period lies in the fact that the condition
of the empire was not hopeless at the time. With
ordinary courage and prudence it might have been
held together, for the attacks directed against it were
not more formidable than others which had been
beaten off with ease. If the blow had fallen when a
hero like Leo III., or even a statesman like Alexius
I. was on the throne, there is no reason to doubt that
it would have been parried. But it fell in the times
of two incompetent triflers, who conducted the state
<pb n='275'/><anchor id='Pg275'/>
on the principle of, <q>Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow
we die.</q> Isaac and Alexius felt in themselves
no power of redeeming the empire from the evil day,
and resignedly fell back on personal enjoyment.
Isaac's taste lay in the direction of gorgeous raiment
and the collecting of miraculous <q>eikons.</q> Alexius
preferred the pleasures of the table. Considered as
sovereigns there was little to choose between them.
Each was competent to ruin an empire already verging
on its decline.
</p>

<p>
The disaster which the Angeli brought on their
realm was rendered possible only by its complete
military and financial disorganization. As a military
power the empire had never recovered the effects of
the Seljouk invasions, which had robbed it of its great
recruiting-ground for its native troops in Asia Minor.
After that loss the use of mercenaries had become
more and more prevalent. The brilliant campaigns
of Manuel Comnenus had been made at the head of a
soldiery of whom two-thirds were not born-subjects of
the empire. He, it is true, had kept them within the
bounds of strict discipline, and contrived at all costs
to provide their pay. But the weak and thriftless
Angeli were able neither to find money nor to
maintain discipline. A state which relies for its
defence on foreign mercenaries is ruined, if it allows
them to grow disorderly and inefficient. In times of
stress they mutiny instead of fighting.
</p>

<p>
The civil administration was in almost as deplorable
a condition, while those two <q>Earthly Angels</q> (as a
contemporary chronicler called them) were charged
with its care. Isaac Angelus put the finishing touch
<pb n='276'/><anchor id='Pg276'/>
to administrative abuses, which had already been rife
enough under the Comneni, by exposing offices and
posts to auction. Instead of paying his officials he <q>sent
them forth without purse or scrip, like the apostles of
old, to make what profit they could by extortion from
the provincials.</q><note place='foot'>Nicetas, <q>Isaac Angelus,</q> book iii. ch. 8, § 6.</note> His brother Alexius promised on
his accession to make all appointments on the ground
of merit, but proved in reality as bad as Isaac. He
was surrounded by a ring of rapacious favourites, who
managed all patronage, and dispensed it in return for
bribes. When high posts were not sold, they were
given as douceurs to men of local influence, whose
rebellion was dreaded.
</p>

<p>
The history of the twenty years covered by the
reigns of the two Angeli is cut into two equal halves
at the deposition of Isaac by his brother in 1195. It
is only necessary to point out how the responsibility for
the disasters of the period is to be divided between
them.
</p>

<p>
Isaac's share consists in the loss of Bulgaria and
Cyprus. The former country had now been in the
hands of the Byzantines for nearly two hundred years,
since its conquest by Basil II. But the Bulgarians
had not merged in the general body of the subjects of
the empire. They preserved their national language
and customs, and never forgot their ancient independence.
In 1187, three brothers named Peter, John,
and Azan stirred up rebellion among them. If firmly
treated it might have been crushed with ease by the
regular troops of the empire. But Isaac first appointed
incompetent generals, who let the rebellion grow to a
<pb n='277'/><anchor id='Pg277'/>
head, and when at last he placed an able officer, Alexis
Branas, in command, his lieutenant took the opportunity
of using his army for revolt. Branas marched
against Constantinople, and would have taken it, had
not Isaac committed the charge of the troops that
remained faithful to him to stronger hands than his
own. He bribed an able adventurer from the West,
Conrad, Marquis of Montferrat, by the offer of his
sister's hand and a great sum of money to become his
saviour. The gallant Lombard routed the forces of
Branas, slew the usurper, and preserved the throne
for his brother-in-law. But while the civil war was
going on, the Bulgarians were left unchecked, and
made such head that there was no longer much
apparent chance of subduing them. Isaac took the
field against them in person, only to see the great
towns of Naissus, Sophia, and Varna taken before his
eyes.
</p>

<p>
While a national revolt deprived the Emperor of
Bulgaria, Cyprus was lost to a meaner force. Isaac
Comnenus, a distant relative of the Emperor Manuel
II., raised rebellion among the Cypriots and defeated
the fleet and army which his namesake of Constantinople
sent against him. He held out for six years,
and appeared likely to establish a permanent kingdom
in the island. This revolt was of the worst augury to
the empire. It had often lost provinces by the invasion
of barbarian hordes, or the rebellion of subject
nationalities. But that a native rebel should sever a
civilized Greek province from the empire, and reign as
<q>Emperor of Cyprus,</q> was a new phenomenon. By
the imperial theory the idea of an independent
<pb n='278'/><anchor id='Pg278'/>
<q>Empire of Cyprus</q> was wholly monstrous and
abnormal. The successful rebellion of Isaac Comnenus
pointed to the possibility of a general breaking up of
the Byzantine dominion into fragments, a danger that
had never appeared before. Till now the provinces
had always obeyed the capital, and no instance had
been known of a rebel maintaining himself by any
other way than the capture of Constantinople. Isaac
Comnenus might, however, have founded a dynasty in
Cyprus, if he had not quarrelled with Richard Coeur-de-Lion,
the crusading King of England. When he
maltreated some shipwrecked English crews, Richard
punished him by landing his army in Cyprus and
seizing the whole island. Isaac was thrown into a
dungeon, and the English king gave his dominions to
Guy of Lusignan, who called in Frank adventurers to
settle up the land, and made it into a feudal kingdom
of the usual Western type.
</p>

<p>
While Isaac II. was in the midst of his Bulgarian
war, and misconducting it with his usual fatuity, he
was suddenly dethroned by a palace intrigue. His
own brother, Alexius Angelus, had hatched a plot
against him, which worked so successfully that Isaac
was caught, blinded, and immured in a monastery
long before his adherents knew that he was in danger.
</p>

<p>
Alexius III. never showed any other proof of energy
save this skilful <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>coup d`état</foreign> aimed against his brother.
He continued the Bulgarian war with the same ill-success
that had attended Isaac's dealings with it.
He plunged into a disastrous struggle with the Seljouk
Sultan of Iconium, and he quarrelled with the
Emperor Henry VI., who would certainly have
<pb n='279'/><anchor id='Pg279'/>
invaded his dominions if death had not intervened to
prevent it. But as long as Alexius was permitted to
enjoy the pleasures of the table in his villas on the
Bosphorus, the ill-success abroad of his arms and
his diplomacy vexed him but little.
</p>

<p>
But in 1203, a new and unexpected danger arose to
scare him from his feasting. His blind brother Isaac
had a young son named Alexius, who escaped from
Constantinople to Italy, and took refuge with Philip
of Suabia, the new Emperor of the West. Philip had
married a daughter of Isaac Angelus, and determined
to do something to help his young brother-in-law.
The opportunity was not hard to seek. Just at this
moment a large body of French, Flemish, and Italian
Crusaders, who had taken arms at the command of
the Pope, were lying idle at Venice. They had
marched down to the great Italian seaport with the
intention of directing a blow against Malek-Adel,
Sultan of Egypt. The Venetians had contracted to
supply them with vessels for the Crusade, but for
reasons of their own had determined that the attack
should not fall on the shore for which it had been
destined. They were on very good terms with the
Egyptian sovereign, who had granted them valuable
commercial privileges at Alexandria, which threw the
whole trade with the distant realms of India into
Venetian hands. Accordingly they had determined
to avert the blow from Egypt and turn it against some
other enemy of Christendom. The leaders of the
Fourth Crusade proved unable to pay the full sum
which they had contracted to give the Venetians as
ship-hire, and this was made an excuse for keeping
<pb n='280'/><anchor id='Pg280'/>
them camped on the unhealthy islands in the Lagoons
till their patience and their stores were alike exhausted.
Henry Dandolo, the aged but wily doge, then proposed
to the Crusaders that they should pay their way by
doing something in aid of Venice. The Dalmatian
town of Zara had lately revolted and done homage to
the King of Hungary; if the Crusaders would recover
it, the Venetian state would wipe out their debts and
transport them whither they wished to go.
</p>

<p>
The Crusaders had taken arms for a holy war
against the Moslems. They were now invited to turn
aside against a Christian town and interest themselves
in Venetian politics. Conscientious men would have
refused to join in such an unholy bargain, and would
have insisted in carrying out their original purpose
against Egypt. But conscientious men had been
growing more and more rare among the Crusaders for
the last hundred years. There were as many greedy
military adventurers among them as single-hearted
pilgrims. The more scrupulous chiefs were over-persuaded
by their designing companions, and the
expedition against Zara was undertaken.
</p>

<p>
Zara fell, but another and a more important
enterprise was then placed before the Crusaders.
While they wintered on the Dalmatian coast the
young Alexius Angelus appeared in their camp,
escorted by the ambassadors of his brother-in-law,
the Emperor Philip of Suabia. The exiled prince
besought them to turn aside once more before they
sailed to the East, and to rescue his blind father from
the dungeon into which he had been cast by his cruel
brother Alexius III. If they would drive out the
<pb n='281'/><anchor id='Pg281'/>
usurper and restore the rightful ruler to his throne,
they should have anything that the Byzantine Empire
could afford to help them for their Crusade&mdash;money
in plenty, stores, a war fleet, a force of mercenary
troops, and his own presence as a helper in the war
with Egypt.
</p>

<p>
Pope Innocent III. had already been storming at
the adventurers for shedding Christian blood at Zara,
and tampering with their Crusader's oath. But the
prospect of Byzantine gold seduced the needy Western
barons, and the desire of keeping the war away from
Egypt ruled the minds of the Venetians. They hesitated
and began to treat with Alexius, though they knew
that thereby they were calling down on themselves
the terrors of a Papal excommunication. All now
depended on the leaders, and among them the abler
minds were set on the acceptance of the proposal of
the young Byzantine exile. The three chiefs of the
Crusade were the Doge Henry Dandolo, Boniface
Marquis of Montferrat, and Baldwin Count of
Flanders. In Dandolo the ruthless energy of the
Italian Republics stood incarnate; he was the one
man in the crusading army who knew exactly what
he wanted. Old and blind, but clear-headed and inflexible,
he was set on revenging an ancient grudge
against the Greeks, and on furthering, by any means,
good or evil, the fortunes of his native city. Baldwin
and Boniface, the two secondary figures in the camp
of the Franks, are perfect representations of the two
types of crusader. The Fleming, gallant and generous,
pious and debonnair, worthy of a more righteous
enterprise and a more honourable death, was a true
<pb n='282'/><anchor id='Pg282'/>
successor of Godfrey of Bouillon, and the heroes of
the First Crusade. The Lombard, a deep and hardy
schemer, to whom force and fraud seemed equally
good, was simply seeking for wealth and fame in the
realms of the East. He cared little for the Holy
Sepulchre, and much for his own private advancement.
Behind these three leaders we descry the motley
crowd of the feudal world; relic-hunting abbots in
coats of mail, wrangling barons and penniless knights,
the half-piratical seamen of Venice, and the brutal
soldiery of the West.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/fig-33.png' rend='width: 80%'>
    <head>View Of Constantinople. (From The Side Of The Harbour.)</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Boniface of Montferrat and Doge Dandolo gradually
talked over the more scrupulous Baldwin and his
friends, and the crusading fleet was launched against
Constantinople, after a treaty had been signed which
bound Alexius Angelus and his blind father, Isaac II.,
to pay the Crusaders 200,000 marks of silver, send
ten thousand men to Palestine, and acknowledge the
supremacy of the Pope over the Eastern Church. In
these conditions lay the germs of much future trouble.
</p>

<p>
The Crusading armament reached the Dardanelles
without having to strike a blow. The slothful and
luxurious emperor let things slide, and had not even a
fleet ready to send against them in the Aegean. He
shut himself up in Constantinople, and trusted to the
strength of its walls to deliver him, as Heraclius and
Leo III. and many more of his predecessors had been
delivered. If the siege had been conducted from the
land side only, his hopes might have been justified,
for the Danes and English of the Varangian Guard beat
back the assault of the Franks on the land-wall. But
Alexius III., unlike earlier emperors, was attacked by
<pb n='284'/><anchor id='Pg284'/>
a fleet to which he could oppose no adequate naval
resistance. Though the Crusaders were driven off on
shore, the Venetians stormed the sea-wall, by the
expedient of building light towers on the decks, and
throwing flying bridges from the towers on to the top
of the Byzantine ramparts. The blind Doge pushed
his galley close under the wall, and urged on his men
again and again till they had won a lodgment in some
towers on the port side of the sea-wall. The Venetians
then fired the city, and a fearful conflagration
followed.
</p>

<p>
Hearing that the enemy was within the ramparts,
the cowardly Alexius III. mounted his horse and fled
away into the inland of Thrace, leaving his troops,
who were not yet half beaten, without a leader or a
cause to fight for. The garrison bowed to necessity,
and the chief officers of the army drew the aged Isaac
II. out of his cloister prison and proclaimed his
restoration to the throne. They sent to the Crusading
camp to announce that hostilities had ceased, and to
beg Prince Alexius to enter the city and join his
father in the palace.
</p>

<p>
The end of the expedition of the Crusaders had
now been attained, but it may safely be asserted that
the chief feeling in their ranks was a bitter disappointment
at being cheated out of the sack of Constantinople,
a prospect over which they had been gloating
ever since they left Zara. They spent the next three
months in endeavouring to wring out of their triumphant
protégés, Isaac and Alexius, every bezant
that could be scraped together. The old emperor,
already blind and gout-ridden, was driven to imbecility
<pb n='285'/><anchor id='Pg285'/>
by their demands: his son was a raw, inexperienced
youth who could neither be firm, nor frank,
nor dignified in dealing with any one. He angered
the Franks by insincere diplomacy, and the Greeks
by his reckless schemes for extracting money from
them. The winter of 1203-4 was spent in ceaseless
wrangling about the subsidy due to the Crusaders, till
Alexius, growing seriously frightened, began exactions
on his subjects which drove them to revolt. When
he seized and melted down the golden lamps and
silver candelabra which formed the pride of St.
Sophia, stripped its eikonostasis of its rich metal
plating, and requisitioned the jewelled eikons and
reliquaries of every church in the city, the populace
would stand his proceedings no longer. They would
not serve an emperor who had sold himself to the
Franks, and only reigned in order to subject the Eastern
Church to Rome, and to pour the hoarded wealth of
the ancient empire into the coffers of the upstart
Italian republics.
</p>

<p>
In January, 1204, the storm burst. The populace
and troops shut the gates of the city, and fell on the
isolated Latins who were within the walls. They
were not long without a leader; a fierce and unscrupulous
officer named Alexius Ducas put himself at
their head and determined to seize the throne. Isaac
II. died of fright in the midst of the tumult; his son
Alexius was caught and strangled by the usurper.
Thus the Angeli ceased out of the land, and Alexius
V. reigned in their stead. He is less frequently
named by chroniclers under his family name of
Ducas, than under his nickname of <q>Murtzuphlus,</q>
<pb n='286'/><anchor id='Pg286'/>
drawn from the bushy overhanging eyebrows which
formed the most prominent feature of his countenance.
</p>

<p>
Alexius Ducas had everything against him. He
was a mere usurper, whose authority was hardly
recognized beyond the walls of Constantinople. The
Angeli had so drained the treasury that nothing
remained in it. Twenty years of indiscipline and
disaster had spoilt the army; the fleet was nonexistent,
for the admirals of Alexius Angelus had laid
up the vessels in ordinary, and sold the stores to fill
their own pockets. Nevertheless Murtzuphlus made
a far better fight than his despicable predecessor and
namesake. He collected a little money by confiscating
the properties of the unpopular courtiers and ministers
of the Angeli, and used it to the best advantage. The
army received some of the arrears due to them, and
Alexius spent every spare moment in seeing to their
drill and endeavouring to improve their discipline.
He strengthened the sea-wall, whose weakness had
been proved so fatally four months ago, by erecting
wooden towers along it, and building platforms for
all the military engines that could be found in the
arsenal. He ordered, too, the enrolment of a
national militia, and compelled the nobles and
burghers of Constantinople to take arms and man
the walls. To the discredit of the Byzantines this
order was received with many murmurs: the citizens
complained that they paid taxes to support the
regular army, and that they therefore ought to be
excused personal service. Little good was got out of
these new and raw levies; they swelled the numbers
<pb n='287'/><anchor id='Pg287'/>
of the garrison, but hardly added anything appreciable
to its strength.
</p>

<p>
Alexius Ducas himself with his cavalry scoured the
country round the Crusading camp every day, to cut
off the foraging parties of the Franks, and when not
in the field, rode round the city superintending the
works, inspecting the guard-posts, and haranguing
the soldiery. If courage and energy command
success, he ought to have held his own. But he could
not counteract the work of twenty years of decay
and disorganization, and felt that his throne rested
on the most fragile of foundations.
</p>

<p>
The Crusaders took two months to prepare for
their second assault on Constantinople, which they
felt would be a far more formidable affair than the
attack in the preceding autumn. They directed their
chief efforts against the sea-wall, which they had
found vulnerable in the previous siege, and left the
formidable land-wall alone. The ships were told off
into groups, each destined to attack a particular
section of the wall, and covered with as many military
engines as they could carry. Flying bridges were
again prepared, and landing parties were directed to
leap ashore on the narrow beach between the wall
and the water, and get to work with rams and scaling
ladders. The attack was made on April 8th, at more
than a hundred points along two miles of sea-wall,
but it was beaten off with loss. Alexius Ducas had
made his arrangements so well, that the fire of his
engines swept off all who attempted to gain a footing
on the ramparts. The ships were much damaged,
and at noon the whole fleet gave back, and retired
<pb n='288'/><anchor id='Pg288'/>
as best it could to the opposite side of the Golden
Horn.
</p>

<p>
Many of the Crusaders were now for returning;
they thought their defeat was a judgment for turning
their arms against a Christian city, and wished to sail
for the Holy Land. But Dandolo and the Venetians
insisted upon repeating the assault. Three days were
spent in repairing the fleet, and on April 12th a second
attack was delivered. This time the ships were lashed
together in pairs to secure stability, and the attack
was concentrated on a comparatively small front of
wall. At last, after much fighting, the military engines
of the fleet and the bolts of its crossbowmen cleared
a single tower of its defenders. A bridge was
successfully lowered on to it, and a footing secured
by a party of Crusaders, who then threw open a
postern gate and let the main body in. After a short
fight within the walls, the troops of Alexius Ducas
retired back into the streets. The Crusaders fired the
city to cover their advance, and by night were in
possession of the north-west angle of Constantinople,
the quarter of the palace of Blachern.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/fig-34.png' rend='width: 80%'>
    <head>Byzantine Reliquary.
(<hi rend='italic'>From "L'Art Byzantin." Par C. Bayet. Paris, Quantin, 1883.</hi>)</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
While the fire was keeping the combatants apart,
the Emperor tried to rally his troops and to prepare
for a street-fight next day. But the army was cowed;
many regiments melted away; and the Varangian
Guard, the best corps in the garrison, chose this
moment to demand that their arrears of pay should
be liquidated; they would not return to the fight
without their money! The twenty years of disorganization
under the Angeli was now bearing its
fruit, and deeply was the empire to rue the next day.
</p>

<pb n='289'/><anchor id='Pg289'/>

<p>
Alexius Ducas, in despair at being unable to make
his men fight, left the city by night. He was soon
followed by the last Greek officer who kept his head,
the general Theodore Lascaris, who endeavoured to
make one final attack on the Crusaders even after
his master had departed. Next morning the Franks
found themselves in full possession of the city, though
they had been expecting to face a hard day of street-fighting
before this end could be attained.
</p>

<pb n='290'/><anchor id='Pg290'/>

<p>
In cold blood, twelve hours after all fighting had
ended, the Crusaders proceeded with great deliberation
to sack the place. The leaders could not or would
not hold back their men, and every atrocity that
attends the storm of a great city was soon in full
swing. Though no resistance was made, the soldiery,
and especially the Venetians, took life recklessly, and
three or four thousand unarmed citizens were slain.
But there was no general massacre; it was lust and
greed rather than bloodthirstiness that the army
displayed. All the Western writers, no less than
the Greeks, testify to the horrors of the three days'
carnival of rape and plunder that now set in. Every
knight or soldier seized on the house that he liked
best, and dealt as he chose with its inmates. Churches
and nunneries fared no better than private dwellings;
the orgies that were enacted in the holiest places
caused even the Pope to exclaim that no good could
ever come out of the conquest. The drunken soldiery
enthroned a harlot in the patriarchal chair in St.
Sophia, and made her rehearse ribald songs and
indecent dances before the high altar. There were
plenty of clergy with the Crusading army, but instead
of endeavouring to check the sacrilegious doings of
their countrymen, they devoted themselves to plundering
the treasuries of the churches of all the holy
bones and relics that were stored in them. <q>The
Franks,</q> remarked a Greek writer who saw the sack
of Constantinople, <q>behaved far worse than Saracens;
the infidels when a town has surrendered at any rate
respect churches and women.</q>
</p>

<p>
After private plunder had reigned unchecked for
<pb n='291'/><anchor id='Pg291'/>
three days, the leaders of the Crusaders collected
such valuables as could be found for public division.
Though so much had been stolen and concealed, they
were able to produce no less than £800,000 in hard
gold and silver for distribution. The sum was afterwards
supplemented by the use of a resource which
makes the modern historian add a special curse of his
own to the account of the Crusaders. Down to 1204
Constantinople still contained the monuments of
ancient Greek art in enormous numbers. In spite
of the wear and tear of 900 years, her squares and
palaces were still crowded with the art-treasures
that Constantine and his sons had stored up.
Nicetas, who was an eyewitness of all, has left us
the list of the chief statues that suffered. The
Heracles of Lysippus, the great Hera of Samos, the
brass figures which Augustus set up after Actium, the
ancient Roman bronze of the Wolf with Romulus and
Remus, Paris with the Golden Apple, Helen of Troy,
and dozens more all went into the melting-pot, to be
recast into wretched copper money. The monuments
of Christian art fared no better; the tombs of the
emperors were carefully stripped of everything in
metal, the altars and screens of the churches scraped
to the stone. Everything was left bare and desolate.
</p>

<p>
Such was <q>the greatest conquest that was ever
seen, greater than any made by Alexander or Charlemagne,
or by any that have lived before or after,</q> as
a Western chronicler wrote, while the Greeks grew
hyperbolical in lamentation, as they saw <q>the eye of
the world, the ornament of nations, the fairest sight
on earth, the mother of churches, the spring whence
<pb n='292'/><anchor id='Pg292'/>
flowed the waters of faith, the mistress of Orthodox
doctrine, the seat of the sciences, draining the cup
mixed for her by the hand of the Almighty, and consumed
by fires as devouring as those which ruined
the five Cities of the Plain.</q>
</p>

<p>
At last the Crusaders sat down to divide up their
conquests. They elected Baldwin of Flanders Emperor
of the East, and handed over to him the ruined
city of Constantinople, half of it devoured by the
flames of the conflagrations that attended the two
sieges, and all of it plundered from cellar to attic.
Four-fifths of the population had fled, and no one
had remained save beggars who had nothing to save
by flight. With the capital Baldwin was given Thrace
and the Asiatic provinces&mdash;Bithynia, Mysia, and
Lydia, all of which had still to be conquered. His
colleague, Boniface of Montferrat, was made <q>King
of Thessalonica,</q> and did homage to Baldwin for a
fief consisting of Macedonia, Thessaly, and inland
Epirus. The Venetians claimed <q>a quarter and
half-a-quarter</q> of the empire, and took out their
share by receiving Crete, the Ionian Islands, the
ports along the west coast of Greece and Albania,
nearly the whole of the islands of the Aegean, and
the land about the entrance of the Dardanelles.
They seized on every good harbour and strong sea-fortress,
but left the inland alone; commerce rather
than annexation was their end. The rest of the
empire was parcelled out among the minor leaders
of the Crusade; they had first to conquer their fiefs,
and were then to do homage for them to the
Emperor Baldwin. Most of them never lived to
<pb n='293'/><anchor id='Pg293'/>
accomplish the scheme. Meanwhile a Venetian
prelate was appointed patriarch of Constantinople,
and news was sent to the Pope that the union of
the Eastern and Western Churches was accomplished,
by the forcible extinction of the Greek patriarchate.
</p>

<p>
It only remains to speak of Alexius Ducas, the
fugitive Greek emperor. He fell into the hands of
the Crusaders, was tried for the murder of the young
Alexius Angelus, and suffered death by being taken
to the top of a lofty pillar and hurled from it. The
Greeks saw in this strange end the fulfilment of an
obscure prophecy about the last of the Caesars, which
had long puzzled the brains of the oracle-mongers.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='294'/><anchor id='Pg294'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>XXIII. The Latin Empire And The Empire Of Nicaea.
(1204-1261.)</head>

<p>
Seldom has any state dragged out fifty-seven
years in such constant misery and danger as the
Latin Empire experienced in the course of its
inglorious existence. The whole period was one
protracted death-agony, and at no date within it
did there appear any reasonable prospect of recovery.
Thirty thousand men can take a city, but they cannot
subdue a realm 800 miles long and 400 broad.
Far more than any government which has since held
sway on the same spot did the Latin Empire of
Romania deserve the name of <q>the Sick Man.</q> It
is not too much to say that but for the unequalled
strength of the walls of Constantinople the new
power must have ceased to exist within ten years of
its establishment.
</p>

<p>
But once fortified within the ramparts of Byzantium
the Franks enjoyed the inestimable advantage which
their Greek predecessors had possessed: they were
masters of a fortress which&mdash;as military science then
<pb n='295'/><anchor id='Pg295'/>
stood&mdash;was practically impregnable, if only it was
defended with ordinary skill, and adequately guarded
on the front facing the sea. As long as the Venetians
kept up their naval supremacy in Eastern waters, the
city was safe on that side, and even the very limited
force which the Latin emperor could put into the
field sufficed, when joined to the armed burghers of
the Italian quarters, to defend the tremendous land
wall.
</p>

<p>
From the first year of its existence the Latin
Empire was marked out by unfailing signs as a
power not destined to continue. The intention of its
founders had been to replace the centralized despotism
which they had overthrown by a great feudal state,
corresponding in territorial extent to its predecessor.
But within a few months it became evident that the
conquest of the broad provinces which the Crusaders
had distributed among themselves by anticipation,
was not to be carried out. The new emperor himself
was the first to discover this. He set out with his
chivalry to drive from Northern Thrace the Bulgarian
hordes, who had flocked down into the plains to
profit by the plunder of the dismembered realm. But
near Adrianople he met Joannicios, the Bulgarian
king, with a vast army at his back. The Franks
charged gallantly enough, but they were simply
overwhelmed by numbers. The larger part of the
army was cut to pieces, and Baldwin himself was
taken prisoner. The Bulgarian kept him in chains
for some months, and then put him to death, after he
had worn the imperial crown only one year [1205].
</p>

<p>
Henry of Flanders, the brother of Baldwin, became
<pb n='296'/><anchor id='Pg296'/>
his successor. He was an honest and able man, but
he could do nothing towards conquering the provinces
of Asia, pushing the Bulgarians back over the
Balkans, or conciliating the subject Greek population.
All his reign he had to fight on the defensive against
his neighbours to the north and south. By the time
that he died the empire was practically confined to
a narrow slip of land along the Propontis, reaching
from Gallipoli to Constantinople. Nor was the chief
of the minor Latin states any better off; Boniface of
Montferrat had fallen in 1207, slain in battle by the
same Bulgarian hordes which had cut off the army
of his suzerain Baldwin. With his death it became
evident that the kingdom of Thessalonica was no
more able to conquer all the old Byzantine provinces
in its neighbourhood than was the empire of Constantinople.
Boniface's son and heir was a mere
infant; during his minority the lands of his kingdom
were lopped away, one after another, by the Greek
despot of Epirus, the able Theodore Angelus. At
last the capital itself was retaken by the Greeks in
1222, and the kingdom of Thessalonica came to an
end.
</p>

<p>
The Latin states in the southern parts of the
Balkan Peninsula fared somewhat better. William of
Champlitte had contrived to hew out for himself a
principality in the western parts of the Peloponnesus,
and had organized there a small state with twelve
baronies and 136 knights fees. The resistance of the
natives in this district was particularly weak, and one
battle sufficed to give William all the coast-plain of
Elis and Messenia. Yet he did not succeed in
<pb n='297'/><anchor id='Pg297'/>
subduing the mountaineers of the peninsula of Maina,
or the coast towns of Argolis and Laconia, so that the
Greeks still had some foothold in the peninsula.
</p>

<p>
Another small Latin state was set up by Otho de
la Roche in Central Greece, where as <q>Duke of
Athens</q> he ruled Attica and Boeotia. He treated
his Greek subjects with more consideration than any
of his fellow Crusaders, and was rewarded by obtaining
a degree of respect and deference which was not
found in any other Latin state. Though the smallest,
the duchy of Athens was undoubtedly the most
prosperous of the new creations of the conquest of
1204.
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile it is time to speak of the fortunes of
those parts of the Eastern Empire which the Franks
did not succeed in seizing when Constantinople fell.
The provinces had hitherto been accustomed to
accept without a murmur the ruler whom the capital
obeyed. But in 1204 it was found that the centralization
of the Byzantine Empire, great as it was, had
not so thoroughly crushed the individuality of the
provinces as to make them submit without resistance
to the Latin yoke. Wherever the provincials found
a leader, whether a member of one of the ex-imperial
houses, or an energetic governor, or a landholder of
local influence, they stood up to defend themselves.
The Byzantine Empire, like some creature of low
organism, showed every sign of life in its limbs,
though its head had been shorn off. Wherever a
centre of resistance could be found the people refused
to submit to the piratical Frank, and to his yet more
hated companions the priests of the Roman Church.
</p>

<pb n='298'/><anchor id='Pg298'/>

<p>
Of the nine or ten leaders who put themselves at
the head of provincial risings three were destined to
carve out kingdoms for themselves. Of these the
most important was Theodore Lascaris, the last
officer who had attempted to strike a blow against
the Franks when Constantinople fell.<note place='foot'>See page <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref>.</note> He might
claim some shadow of hereditary right to the imperial
crown as he had married the daughter of the imbecile
Alexius III., but his true title was his well-approved
courage and energy. The wrecks of the old Byzantine
army rallied around him, the cities of Bithynia opened
their gates, and when the Latins crossed into Asia to
divide up the land into baronies and knights fees,
they found Theodore waiting to receive them with
the sword. His defence of the strong town of Prusa,
which successfully repelled Henry of Flanders, put a
limit to the extension of the Frank Empire; beyond
a few castles on the Bithynian coast they made no
conquests. Having thus checked the invaders,
Theodore had himself solemnly crowned at Nicaea,
and assumed imperial state [1206].
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/fig-35.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <head>Finial From A Byzantine MS.
(<hi rend='italic'>From "L'Art Byzantin." Par C. Bayet. Paris, Quantin, 1883.</hi>)</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Having beaten off the Latins, Theodore had to
cope with another who aspired like himself to pose
as the rightful heir to the imperial throne. Alexius
Comnenus, a grandson of the wicked emperor
Andronicus I., had betaken himself to the Eastern
frontiers of the empire when Constantinople fell, and
obtained possession of Trebizond and the long slip of
coast-land at the south-east corner of the Black Sea,
from the mouth of the Phasis to Sinope. He aspired
to conquer the whole of Byzantine Asia, and sent his
<pb n='299'/><anchor id='Pg299'/>
brother David Comnenus to attack Bithynia. But
Theodore defended his newly won realm with success;
Comnenus gained no territory from him, and was
constrained to content himself with the narrow bounds
of his Pontic realm, where his descendants reigned in
obscurity for three hundred years as emperors of
Trebizond. A greater danger beset the empire of
Nicaea when the warlike sultan of the Seljouks came
down from his plateau to ravage its borders. But the
valour of Theodore Lascaris triumphed over this
enemy also. In the battle of Antioch-on-Maeander
he slew Sultan Kaikhosru with his own hand in single
<pb n='300'/><anchor id='Pg300'/>
combat, and the Turks were beaten back with such
slaughter that they left the empire alone for a generation.
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile a third Greek state had sprung into
existence in the far West. Michael Angelus, a cousin
of Alexius III. and Isaac II., put in a claim to their
heritage, though he was disqualified by his illegitimate
birth. He was recognized as ruler by the cities of
Epirus, and proclaimed himself <q>despot</q> of that land.
Raising an army among the warlike tribes of Albania,
he maintained his position with success, and discomfited
the Franks of Athens and Thessalonica
when they took arms against him. He died early,
but left a compact heritage to his brother Theodore,
who succeeded him on the throne, and within a few
years conquered the whole of the Frank kingdom of
Thessalonica.
</p>

<p>
It was soon evident that there would be a trial
of strength between the two Greek emperors who
claimed to succeed to the rights of the dispossessed
Angeli. The Latin Empire was obviously destined
to fall before one of them. The only doubt was,
whether the Epirot or the Nicene was to be its
conqueror. This question was not settled till 1241,
when the two powers met in decisive conflict.
</p>

<p>
By this time Theodore Lascaris had been succeeded
in Asia by his son-in-law John Ducas,<note place='foot'>Sometimes known as John Vatatzes.</note> and Theodore
of Thessalonica by his son John Angelus. At
Constantinople the succession of Latin emperors had
been much more rapid. Henry of Flanders had died
in 1216; he was followed by Peter of Courtenay, who
<pb n='301'/><anchor id='Pg301'/>
was slain by the Epirots in less than a year. To him
succeeded Robert his son, and when Robert died in
1228 his brother Baldwin II., reigned in his stead.
The young Courtenays were both thoroughly incapable,
and saw their empire melt away from them
till nothing was left beyond the walls of Constantinople
itself.
</p>

<p>
John III. of Nicaea was an excellent sovereign, a
very worthy heir to his gallant father-in-law. Not
only was he a good soldier and an able administrator,
but by constant supervision and strict frugality he
had got the financial condition of his empire into a
more hopeful condition&mdash;a state of things which had
never been seen in Romania since the time of John
Comnenus, a hundred years before. In 1230 the
troops of Nicaea crossed into Europe, and drove the
Franks out of Southern Thrace, while in 1235 John
Ducas laid siege to Constantinople itself. But the
time of its fall was not yet arrived, and when a
Venetian fleet approached to succour it the Emperor
was constrained to raise the siege.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/fig-36.png' rend='width: 80%'>
    <head>Fountain In The Court Of St. Sophia.</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Recognizing that Constantinople was not yet ripe
for its fall, John Ducas resolved to measure himself
with his rivals the Angeli of Thessalonica. He beat
their forces out of the field, and laid siege to their
capital in 1341. Then John Angelus engaged to
resign the title of emperor, call himself no more than
<q>despot of Epirus,</q> and to acknowledge himself as the
vassal of the ruler of Nicaea. This satisfied Ducas
for a time, but when Angelus died, four years later,
he seized Thessalonica and united it to the imperial
crown. The heir of the Angeli escaped to Albania
<pb n='303'/><anchor id='Pg303'/>
and succeeded in retaining a small fraction only of
his ancestral dominions [1246].
</p>

<p>
John Ducas died in 1254, leaving the throne of
Nicaea to his son Theodore II., who bid fair to
continue the prosperous career of his father and
grandfather. He drove the Bulgarians out of
Macedonia, and penned the Albanians into their
hills. But he became subject to epileptic fits, and died
after a reign of only four years, before he had reached
the age of thirty-eight [1258].
</p>

<p>
This was a dreadful misfortune for the empire, for
John Ducas, the son and heir of Theodore, was a child
of eight years, and minorities were always disastrous
to the state. We have seen in the history of previous
centuries how frequently the infancy of a prince led
to a violent contest for the place of regent, or even to
a usurpation of the throne. The case of John IV.
was no exception to the rule; the ministers of his
father fought and intrigued to gain possession of the
helm of affairs, till at last an able and unprincipled
general, named Michael Paleologus, thrusting himself
to the front, was named tutor to the Emperor, and
given the title of <q>Despot.</q>
</p>

<p>
Michael was as ambitious as he was unscrupulous.
The place of regent was far from satisfying his
ambition, and he determined to seize the throne,
though he had steeped himself to the lips in oaths of
loyalty to his young master. He played much the
same game that Richard III. was destined to repeat
in England two centuries later. He cleared away
from the capital the relatives and adherents of the
little prince, placed creatures of his own in their
<pb n='304'/><anchor id='Pg304'/>
places, and conciliated the clergy by large gifts and
hypocritical piety. Presently the partisans of Michael
began to declaim against the dangers of a minority,
and the necessity for a strong hand at the helm.
After much persuasion and mock reluctance the
regent was induced to allow himself to be crowned.
From that moment the boy John Ducas was thrust
aside and ignored: ere he had reached the age of ten
his wicked guardian put out his eyes and plunged
him into a dungeon, where he spent thirty years in
darkness and misery.
</p>

<p>
The usurpation of Michael tempted all the enemies
of the Greek Empire to take arms. The Epirot
despot allied himself with the Frankish lords of
Greece, and their united armies, aided by auxiliaries
from Italy, invaded Macedonia; moreover the Latin
emperor of Constantinople stirred up the Venetians
to ravage his neighbours' borders. But in 1260 the
troops of Michael won, over the allied armies of the
Franks and Epirots, the last great victory that a
Byzantine army was ever destined to achieve. The
field of Pelagonia decided the lot of the house of
Paleologus, for Michael's enemies were so crushed
that they could never afterwards make head against
him.
</p>

<p>
Freed from all danger from the West, Michael was
now able to turn against Constantinople, and complete
the reconstruction of the empire. The city was ripe
for its fall, and Baldwin of Courtenay had long been
awaiting his doom.
</p>

<p>
The long reign of the last Latin sovereign of
Constantinople is sufficiently characterized by the
<pb n='305'/><anchor id='Pg305'/>
fact that Baldwin spent nearly half the years of his
rule outside the bounds of Romania, as he wandered
from court to court in the West, striving to stir up
some champion who would deliver him from the
inevitable destruction impending over his realm. He
gained little by his tours, his greatest success being
that, in 1244, he got from St. Louis a considerable
sum of ready money in acknowledgment of the
liberality with which he had presented the holy king
with a choice selection of relics, including the rod of
Moses, the jawbone of John the Baptist, and our
Lord's crown of thorns.
</p>

<p>
In 1261 Baldwin was in worse straits than ever.
He was stripping off the lead of his own palace roof,
to sell it for a few zecchins to the Venetians, and
burning the beams of his outhouses in default of
money to buy fuel. His son and heir was in pawn to
the Venetian banking firm of the Capelli, who had
taken him as the only tangible security that could be
found for a modest loan which they had advanced to
the imperial exchequer. With the government in
such a desperate condition there was no longer any
power of resistance left in Constantinople. When
the Venetian fleet, the sole remaining defence of the
empire, was away at sea, the city fell before a sudden
and unpremeditated attack, made by Alexius Strategopulus,
commander in Thrace under the emperor
Michael.
</p>

<p>
Alexius, with eight hundred regular troops and a
few scores of half-armed volunteers, was admitted by
treachery within the walls. Before this formidable
array the heirs of the Crusaders fled in base dismay,
<pb n='306'/><anchor id='Pg306'/>
and the Empire of Romania came to an inglorious
and a well-deserved end.
</p>

<p>
Its monarch resumed his habitual mendicant tours
in Western Europe, and never ceased to besiege the
ears of popes and kings with demands for aid to
recover his lost realm. At last Baldwin passed away:
his sole memorial is the fact that he made a distressed
and itinerant emperor in search of a champion, one
of the stock figures in the Romances of his day. No
one in Western Europe was ignorant of his tale, and
he survives as the prototype of the dispossessed
sovereigns of fifty legends of chivalry.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='307'/><anchor id='Pg307'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>XXIV. Decline And Decay. (1261-1328.)</head>

<p>
There was now once more a Byzantine empire,
and to an unobservant reader the history of the
reigns of the Paleologi looks like the natural continuation
and sequel of the history of the reigns of
Isaac Angelus and his brother. If the annals of
Michael VIII. and his son were written on to the end
of that of Alexius Angelus, the intervening gap of
the Latin Conquest might almost pass unperceived,
and the reader might imagine that he was investigating
a single continuous course of events. The
Frank dominion at Constantinople, and the heroic
episode of the Empire of Nicaea, would pass equally
unnoticed.
</p>

<p>
We need not insist on the perniciousness of such
a view. Great as may seem the similarity of the
Byzantine Empire of 1204, and that of 1270, it had
really suffered an entire transformation in that period.
To commence by the most obvious and external sign
of change, it will be observed that the lands subject
<pb n='308'/><anchor id='Pg308'/>
to Michael Paleologus were far more limited in
extent than those which had obeyed Alexius Angelus.
The loss in Asia was less than might have been
expected: Theodore Lascaris and John Ducas had
kept back the Turk, and only two districts of no great
extent had fallen into Moslem hands&mdash;the Pisidian
coast with the seaport of Adalia on the south, and
the Paphlagonian coast with the seaport of Sinope
on the north. Besides these the distant Pontic province
had now become the empire of Trebizond.
</p>

<p>
In Europe the loss was far more serious: four great
blocks of territory had been lost for ever. The first
was a slip along the southern slope of the Balkans, in
Northern Thrace and Macedonia, which had fallen
into the hands of the Bulgarians, and become completely
Slavonized. The second was the district
which is represented by the modern land of
Albania. When the Angeli of Thessalonica fell before
John Ducas, a younger member of the house
retired to the original mountain house of the dynasty,
and preserved the independence of the <q>Despotate
of Epirus.</q> Here the Angeli survived for some
generations, maintaining themselves against the
Emperors of Constantinople by a strict alliance with
the Latin princes of Southern Greece.
</p>

<p>
Next in the list of Old-Byzantine territories which
Michael never recovered, we must place Greece
proper, now divided between the Princes of Achaia,
of the house of Villehardouin, and the Briennes, who
had succeeded to the Duchy of Athens. But the
Paleologi still retained a considerable slice of the
Peloponnesus, and were destined to encroach ere
<pb n='309'/><anchor id='Pg309'/>
long on their Frankish neighbours. Lastly, we must
mention the islands of the Aegean, of which the large
majority were held either by the Venetian government,
or by Venetian adventurers, who ruled as
independent lords, but subordinated their policy to
that of their native state.
</p>

<p>
But the territorial difference between the empire
of 1204 and the empire of 1261 was only one
of the causes which crippled the realm of the
Paleologi. Bad though the internal government
of the dominions of Alexius III. had been, there
was still then some hope of recovery. The old
traditions of East-Roman administrative economy,
though neglected, were not lost, and might have
been revived by an emperor who had a keen eye to
discover ability and a ready hand to reward merit.
New blood in the <emph>personnel</emph> of the ministry, and a
keen supervision of details by the master's eye, would
have produced an improvement in the state of the
empire, though any permanent restoration of strength
was probably made impossible by the deep-seated
decay of society. But by the time of Michael
Paleologus even amelioration had become impossible.
The three able emperors who reigned at
Nicaea, though they had preserved their independence
against Turk and Frank, had utterly failed in
restoring administrative efficiency in their provinces.
John Vatatzes, himself a thrifty monarch, who could
even condescend to poultry-farming to fill his modest
exchequer, found that all his efforts to protect native
industry could not cause the dried-up springs of
prosperity to flow again. The whole fiscal and administrative
<pb n='310'/><anchor id='Pg310'/>
machinery of government had been thrown
hopelessly out of gear.
</p>

<p>
It was the commercial decline of the empire that
made a reform of the administration so hopeless.
The Paleologi were never able to reassert the old
dominion over the seas which had made their predecessors
the arbiters of the trade of Christendom. The
wealth of the elder Byzantine Empire had arisen from
the fact that Constantinople was the central emporium
of the trade of the civilized world. All the
caravan routes from Syria and Persia converged
thither. Thither, too, had come by sea the commodities
of Egypt and the Euxine. All the Eastern products
which Europe might require had to be sought
in the storehouses of Constantinople, and for centuries
the nations of the West had been contented to go
thither for them. But the Crusades had shaken this
monopoly, when they taught the Italians to seek the
hitherto unknown parts of Syria and Egypt, and
buy their Eastern merchandize from the producer
and not from the middleman. Acre and Alexandria
had already profited very largely at the expense of
Constantinople ere the Byzantine Empire was upset
in 1204. But the Latin conquest was the fatal blow.
It threw the control of the trade of the Bosphorus
into the hands of the Venetians, and the Venetians
had no desire to make Constantinople their one
central mart: they were just as ready to trade through
the Syrian and Egyptian ports. To them the city
was no more than an important half-way house for
the Black Sea trade, and an emporium for the local
produce of the countries round the Sea of Marmora.
</p>

<pb n='311'/><anchor id='Pg311'/>

<p>
From 1204 onward Italy rather than Constantinople
became the centre and starting-place for all European
trade, and the great Italian republics employed all
their vigilance to prevent the Greek fleet from recovering
its old strength. Henceforth the Byzantine
war-navy was insignificant, and without a war-navy
the Paleologi could not drive away the intruders and
restore the free navigation of the Levant to their own
mercantile marine.
</p>

<p>
The emperors who succeeded each other on the
restored throne of Constantinople were, without exception,
men more fitted to lose than to hold together
an exhausted and impoverished empire. Their lot
was cast, it is true, in hard times; but hardly one of
them showed a spark of ability or courage in endeavouring
to face the evil day. The three monarchs of
the house of Lascaris who ruled at Nicaea had been
keen soldiers and competent administrators, but with
the return of the emperors to Constantinople the
springs of energy began to dry up, and the gloom
and decay of the ruined capital seemed to affect the
spirit and brain of its rulers.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/fig-37.png' rend='width: 60%'>
    <head>Byzantine Chapel At Ani, The Old Capital Of Armenia.
(<hi rend='italic'>From "L'Art Byzantin." Par Charles Bayet. Paris, Quantin, 1883.</hi>)</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Michael Paleologus, though it was his fortune to
recover the city which his abler predecessors had
failed to take, was a mere wily intriguer, not a statesman
or general. Having usurped the throne by the
basest treachery towards his infant sovereign, he
always feared for himself a similar fate. Suspicion
and cruelty were his main characteristics, and in his
care for his own person he quite forgot the interests
of the State. Even contemporary chroniclers saw
that he was deliberately setting himself to weaken
<pb n='313'/><anchor id='Pg313'/>
the empire, because he dreaded the resentment of his
subjects. He disbanded nearly all the native Greek
troops, and refrained as far as possible from employing
Greek generals.
</p>

<p>
One of his minor acts in this direction may be said
to have been the original circumstance which set the
Ottoman Turks, the future bane of the empire, on
their career of conquest. The borders of the empire
in Asia were defended by a native militia, who held
their lands under condition of defending the castles
and passes of the Bithynian and Phrygian mountains.
The institution, which somewhat resembled a simple
form of European feudalism, had worked so well that
the Byzantine Empire had for a century and a half
kept its Asiatic frontier practically intact, in spite of
all the pressure of the Seljouk Turks of the Sultanate
of Iconium. But the Bithynian militia were known
to be attached to the house of Ducas, which Michael
had dethroned, and he therefore resolved to disarm
them. The measure was carried out, not without
bloodshed, but the disbanded levy were not replaced
by any adequate number of regular troops. Michael's
financial straits did not permit him to keep under
arms a very large force, such as was required to
garrison his eastern line of forts after the abolition
of the previous machinery of defence. Ten years
only before Othman, the father of the Ottoman
Turks, succeeded to the petty principality which was
destined to be the nucleus of the Turkish Empire, the
way for him had been thrown open by Michael's
suspicious disarmament of the guards of his own
frontier.
</p>

<pb n='314'/><anchor id='Pg314'/>

<p>
Michael lived for twenty-one years after the recovery
of Constantinople, but he did not win a single
important advantage in all the rest of his reign. In
Europe he barely held his own against the Bulgarians,
the Franks, and the fleets of Genoa and Venice.
The troubles which befell him at the hands of the two
naval powers were largely of his own creation, for he
shifted his alliance from one to the other with such
levity and suddenness that both regarded him as
unfriendly. Though all through his reign he was at
war either with Genoa or Venice, yet such was the
distrust felt for him that, when at war with one of the
rivals, he could not always secure the help of the other.
Venice had been the mainstay of the Frank emperors
of Constantinople, and Michael might, therefore, have
been expected to remain staunch to the Genoese.
On the other hand, the Genoese had designs on the
Black Sea trade, which touched the Emperor's pocket
very closely, while the Venetians were more connected
with the distant commerce of Syria and
Egypt, which did not concern him. Balancing one
consideration with the other, Michael played false to
both the powers, and often saw his coast ravaged and
his small fleet compelled to take refuge in the Golden
Horn, while the enemy's vessels swept the seas. On
land he was less unlucky, and the Duke of Athens
and the despot of Epirus were both kept in check,
though neither of them were subdued.
</p>

<p>
But it was in Asia that Michael's rule was most
unfortunate. In the second half of his reign the
Seljouks, though split into several principalities owing
to the break up of the Sultanate of Iconium, united
<pb n='315'/><anchor id='Pg315'/>
to assail the borders of the empire. They conquered
the Carian and Lydian inland, though Tralles and
several other towns made a vigorous resistance, and
reduced Michael's dominion in South-western Asia
Minor to a mere strip along the coast. A similar
fate befell Eastern Bithynia, where the Turks forced
their way as far as the river Sangarius.
</p>

<p>
But the ruin of Byzantine Asia was reserved to fall
into the times of Michael's son and successor, Andronicus
II. This prince had all the faults of his father,
levity, perfidy, and cruelty, with others added from
which Michael had been free&mdash;cowardice and superstition.
The main interest which Andronicus took
in life was concerned with things ecclesiastical&mdash;it
would be wrong to say things religious&mdash;and he
spent his life in making and unmaking patriarchs of
Constantinople. No prelate could bear with him
long, and in the course of his reign he deposed no
less than nine of them.
</p>

<p>
While Andronicus was quarrelling with his patriarchs
the empire was going to ruin. The Seljouk
chiefs from the plateau of Asia Minor were pressing
down more and more towards the coast, and making
their way to the very gates of Ephesus and Smyrna.
At last the emperor, growing seriously alarmed when
the Turks appeared on the shores of the Propontis
itself, and threatened the walls of Nicaea and Prusa,
resolved to make an unwonted effort to beat them
back.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/fig-38.png' rend='width: 80%'>
    <head>Adronicus Paleologus Adoring Our Lord.
(<hi rend='italic'>From "L'Art Byzantin." Par Charles Bayet. Paris, Quantin, 1883.</hi>)</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
In 1302 the long war of the <q>Sicilian Vespers</q>
between the houses of Anjou and Aragon came to an
end, and the hordes of mercenaries of all nations
<pb n='317'/><anchor id='Pg317'/>
which the two pretenders to the crown of Sicily had
maintained were turned loose on the world. It
occurred to Andronicus that he might hire enough of
the veterans of the Sicilian war to enable him to beat
back the Turks into their hills. All Europe acknowledged
that they were the hardiest and best-disciplined
troops in Christendom, though they were also the
most cruel and lawless. Accordingly the emperor
applied to Roger de Flor, a renegade Templar, the
commander of the mercenaries who had served
Frederic of Aragon, and offered to take him into his
service, with as many of his followers as could be
induced to accompany him. Roger accepted with
alacrity, and came to Constantinople in 1303 with
6,000 men at his back; other bodies were soon to
follow. Andronicus loaded the <q>Grand Company,</q>
as Roger de Flor styled his men, with unlimited
promises, and a certain amount of ready money.
Roger himself was given the title of <q>Grand Duke,</q>
and married to a lady of the imperial house. After
clearing the Turks out of the Bithynian coast-land
the <q>Grand Company</q> spent the winter of 1303-4
in free quarters along the southern coast of Propontis.
Their plundering habits and their arrogance soon
brought them into ill odour with the inhabitants, who
complained that they were well-nigh as great a curse
as the Turks. In the next year Roger moved south
with his host, and drove the Turks out of Lydia and
Caria; but instead of putting the emperor into possession
of the reconquered land, he garrisoned every
fortress with his own men, and raised and appropriated
the imperial taxes. There can be little doubt
<pb n='318'/><anchor id='Pg318'/>
that he was plotting to seize on the provinces he had
regained, and to reign at Ephesus as an independent
prince. At last Roger went so far as to lay formal
siege to Philadelphia, because its inhabitants preferred
to obey orders from Constantinople, and would not
admit him within their gates. Andronicus then lured
him to an interview at Adrianople, and in his very
presence the great <foreign lang='it' rend='italic'>condottiere</foreign> was assassinated by
George the Alan, an officer whose son had been slain
in a brawl by Roger's soldiers. The Emperor had
probably arranged the murder, and certainly refused
to arrest its perpetrator [1307].
</p>

<p>
He was promptly punished. The <q>Grand Company</q>
was not disorganized by the loss of its leader,
and thought of nothing but revenge. Assembling
themselves in haste, and abandoning Asia Minor to
the Turks, they marched on Constantinople, harrying
the land far and wide with fiendish cruelty. The
Emperor sent his son Michael against them, but the
young prince was disgracefully beaten in two fights
at Gallipoli and Apros, and the mercenaries spread
themselves all over Thrace and plundered it up to
the gates of the capital. It almost looked as if a
second Latin Conquest of Constantinople was about
to take place, for the leaders of the <q>Grand Company</q>
got succour from Europe, raised a corps of Turkish
auxiliaries, and occupied Thrace for two years. But
they could not storm the walls of Constantinople
or Adrianople, and at last, after two years of plundering,
they had stripped the country so bare that they
were driven away by famine. Drifting southward
and westward they ravaged Macedon and Thessaly,
<pb n='319'/><anchor id='Pg319'/>
and at last reached Greece. Here they fell into a
quarrel with Walter de Brienne, Duke of Athens,
slew him in battle and took his capital. Then at
last did the wandering horde settle down; they
seized the duchy, divided its fiefs among themselves,
and established a new dynasty on the Athenian
throne. The empire was at last quit of them, for
when once they ceased to wander the <q>Grand Company</q>
ceased to be dangerous.
</p>

<p>
This disastrous war with the mercenaries not only
ruined Thrace and Macedonia, but was the cause of
the final loss of the Byzantine provinces of Asia
Minor. While Andronicus was feebly attempting to
cope with the <q>Grand Company,</q> the Seljouk chiefs
had conquered Lydia and Phrygia once more, and
then advanced yet further north to siege Mysia and
Bithynia. By 1325 they had reduced the Emperor's
dominions on the east of the straits to a narrow strip,
reaching from the Dardanelles to the northern exit of
the Bosphorus, and bounded by the Bithynian hills to
the south. Five Seljouk leaders had carved out for
themselves principalities in the conquered districts,
Menteshe in the south, Aidin and Saroukhan in
Lydia, Karasi in Mysia, and in the Bithynian borderland
Othman, destined to a fame very different from
that of his long-forgotten compeers.
</p>

<p>
While Othman and the rest were turning the once
thickly-peopled countries of Western Asia Minor into
a desert sparsely inhabited by wandering nomads,
Andronicus II. was busied in a war even more uncalled
for than that with the mercenaries. He
wished to exclude from the succession to the throne
<pb n='320'/><anchor id='Pg320'/>
his grandson and heir, who bore the same name as
himself. But the younger Andronicus took measures
to defend his rights, and raised armed bands. Grandfather
and grandson were ere long engaged in a long
but feebly-conducted war, which was only terminated
in 1328, when the old man acknowledged Andronicus
the younger as his heir, and made him his colleague
on the throne. But his grandson, not contented with
this measure of success, made him retire from the
conduct of affairs, and assumed control over every
function of government. The name of Andronicus
II. was still associated with that of Andronicus III.
on the coinage and in the public prayers, but he took
no further part in the rule of the empire. In 1332
he died, at a good old age, lamented by no single
individual in the realm which he had ruled for fifty
years. At his death the empire was only two-thirds
of the size that it had been at his accession.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='321'/><anchor id='Pg321'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>XXV. The Turks In Europe.</head>

<p>
Andronicus III. was a shade better than the
incapable old man whom he supplanted. Though
he was given&mdash;like all his house&mdash;to treachery and
deceit, and though his life was loose and luxurious,
he was at any rate active and energetic. He may be
described as a weak reflection or copy of Manuel
Comnenus, being a mighty hunter, a bold spear both
in the tournament and on the battle-field, and a great
spender of money. If he had not the brains to keep
his empire together, he at any rate fought his best,
and did not sit apathetically at home like his grandfather
while everything was going to rack and ruin.
</p>

<p>
Nevertheless, Andronicus III. was destined to see
the termination of the process which had begun under
Andronicus II.&mdash;the entire loss of the Asiatic provinces
of the empire to the Turks. It was now with the
Ottomans almost exclusively that he had to deal; the
other Seljouk hordes had no longer any marchland
along the shrunken frontier of his dominions.
</p>

<p>
These new foes of the empire deserve a word of
description. Othman, the son of Ertogrul, was a
<pb n='322'/><anchor id='Pg322'/>
vassal of the Seljouk Sultan of Roum, who had been
granted a tract in the Phrygian highlands under the
condition of military service against the Greeks. His
fief lay in the north-west angle of the great central
plateau of Asia Minor. Behind it lay the rolling
country of hills and uplands already occupied by the
Seljouks. Before it were the Bithynian mountains,
with their passes protected by forts, and garrisoned
by local militia, till the day when they were so perversely
stripped of their defenders by the action of
Michael Paleologus. Othman, and his father Ertogrul
before him, owned nothing in the hills, nor could they
have pushed on if Michael had not made the way
easy for them. But after 1270 the native militia was
gone, and the followers of Othman, instead of having
to face an armed population, fighting to protect its
own fields, found to oppose them only inadequate
garrisons of regular troops at long intervals.
</p>

<p>
Othman's life covered two series of great events,
the disastrous reign of Andronicus II. at Constantinople,
and in Asia Minor the no less disastrous
break-up of the power of his own suzerain, the Sultan
of Roum. In 1294, Gaiaseddin, the last undisputed
sovereign of the Seljouk line, fell in battle against
rebels; and in 1307, Alaeddin III., the last prince who
claimed to be supreme Sultan, died in exile. This
made Othman an independent prince; but he did
not take the title of Sultan, contenting himself with
the humbler name of Emir.
</p>

<p>
Othman's field of operation from 1281 to 1326
was the Byzantine borderland of Bithynia and Mysia.
He was by no means the strongest of the Seljouk
<pb n='323'/><anchor id='Pg323'/>
chiefs who made a lodgement within the borders of
the empire, and it took him twenty years before he
conquered one large town. His wild horsemen harried
the open sea-coast plain of Bithynia again and
again, till at last the wretched inhabitants emigrated,
or acknowledged him as their sovereign. But the
towns, within their strong Roman walls, were unassailable
by the light cavalry which formed his only armed
strength. The siege of Prusa [Broussa], the capital
and key of the region, lasted ten years. The Turks
built a chain of forts around it and gradually made
the introduction of provisions more and more difficult,
till at last a large force was required to march out
every time that a convoy was expected. At length the
inhabitants could find no advantage in spending their
whole lives in a beleaguered town undergoing slow
starvation. Prusa surrendered in 1326, and Othman
heard of the news on his death-bed. The Turkish
frontier now once again touched the Sea of Marmora,
which it had not reached since the Crusaders thrust it
back inland in 1097.
</p>

<p>
The reign of Othman's son Orkhan, the second
Emir of the Ottomans, almost coincided with that of
Andronicus III. All that the one lost the other
gained. Orkhan's life-work was the completion of
the conquest of Bithynia, which his father had begun.
He took Nicomedia in 1327 and Nicaea in 1333, with
all the surrounding territory, so that Andronicus
retained nothing but Chalcedon and the district
immediately facing Constantinople beyond the Bosphorus.
Only once did he have to meet the Emperor
in pitched battle; this was at the fight of Pelekanon
<pb n='324'/><anchor id='Pg324'/>
in 1329. Andronicus was wounded early in the day,
and his army, deprived of its leader went to pieces
and was severely beaten. After his recovery from his
wounds the Emperor never faced the Ottomans
again.
</p>

<p>
After conquering Bithynia, Orkhan subdued his
nearest neighbours among the other Seljouk Emirs,
and then turned to organizing his state. This was
the date of the institution of his famous corps of the
Janissaries, the first steady infantry that any Eastern
power had ever possessed. He imposed on his
Christian subjects in Mysia and Bithynia a tribute,
not of money, but of male children. The boys were
taken over while very young, placed in barracks,
educated in the strictest and most fanatical Moslem
code, and trained to the profession of arms. Having
light horse enough and to spare, Orkhan taught the
Janissaries to fight on foot with bow and sabre.
They were well drilled, and moved in compact masses,
which for many ages no foe proved competent to
sunder and disperse. So thorough was the physical
and moral discipline to which the Janissaries were
subjected, that it was almost unknown for one of them
to turn back from his career and relapse into Christianity.
To keep them firm in their allegiance there
acted not only the military and conventual discipline
to which they were subject, but the dazzling prospect
of future greatness. The Ottoman sovereigns made it
their rule to select their generals and governors, their
courtiers and personal attendants from the ranks of
the tribute-children. It was calculated that more
than two-thirds of the Grand-Viziers of Turkey, in
<pb n='325'/><anchor id='Pg325'/>
the fourteenth, fifteenth, and sixteenth centuries, had
begun their career as Janissaries.
</p>

<p>
The first generation of the <q>New Soldiery</q> [for
such is the meaning of the word Janissary] grew up
to the military age during the latter half of the reign
of Orkhan, and it was he who first utilized them on
the European shore of the Bosphorus.
</p>

<p>
Andronicus III. died in 1241, and left his shrunken
dominions to the risks of a minority, for his son and
heir, John III., was only nine years of age. If anything
had been wanting to aid in the destruction of
the empire, it was the arrival of such a contingency.
The usual troubles soon set in, and the inevitable
civil war was not far off.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/fig-39.png' rend='width: 80%'>
    <head>John Cantacuzenus Sitting In State.
(<hi rend='italic'>From a Contemporary MS.</hi>)
(<hi rend='italic'>From "L'Art Byzantin." Par C. Bayet. Paris, Quantin, 1883.</hi>)</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
The evil spirit of the time was John Cantacuzenus,
the prime minister of the deceased emperor. He was
a clever, shifty, intriguing courtier, with a turn for
literature, but had the abilities neither of a general nor
of a statesman. However, he had read the tale of the
rise of the Paleologi to some purpose, and had resolved
to imitate the career of Michael VIII. Now, as in
1258, there was the best of chances for an unscrupulous
minister to make himself first the colleague and then
the supplanter of his young master. Cantacuzenus
did his best to repeat the doings of Michael on
Michael's great-great-grandson. He bribed and intrigued,
made himself a party in the state, and
prepared for a <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>coup d'état</foreign> when the time should be
ripe. Unfortunately for himself, Cantacuzenus was
not of the stuff of which successful usurpers are
made. He had his scruples and superstitions, and
showed a fatal habit of procrastination which always
<pb n='326'/><anchor id='Pg326'/>
led him to act a day too late. The Empress Dowager,
Anne of Savoy, succeeded in raising a party against
him, and when he threw off the mask and declared
himself emperor he found himself unable to seize the
capital, though he mustered an army under its walls.
<pb n='327'/><anchor id='Pg327'/>
Finding that he was playing a losing game, Cantacuzenus
took the usual step of calling in the national
enemy to aid him. It was for the last time that this
was done in Byzantine history, but never before had
the result been so fatal. The usurper summoned to
his aid first Stephen Dushan, the king of the Servians,
and a little later the Turkish princes from across the
Aegean&mdash;Orkhan the son of Othman, and his rival,
Amour, Emir of Aidin.
</p>

<p>
These allies kept the cause of John Cantacuzenus
from destruction, but it was by destroying the empire
that John had coveted. King Stephen entered Macedonia
and Thrace, and occupied the whole countryside,
except Thessalonica and a few other towns.
He then pushed further south, conquered Thessaly,
and made the despot of Epirus do him homage. The
Byzantine government retained little more than the
capital, and the districts round Adrianople and Thessalonica.
Most of this country was lost for ever to
the imperial crown, and it seemed as if a Servian
domination in the Balkan Peninsula was about to
begin, for Stephen moved south from Servia, made
Uscup in Macedonia his capital, and proclaimed
himself <q>Emperor of the Servians and Romans.</q>
</p>

<p>
It would perhaps have been well for Christendom
if Stephen had actually conquered Constantinople and
made an end of the empire. In that case there would
have been a single great power in the Balkan Peninsula,
ready to meet the oncoming assault of the Turks.
But Dushan was not strong enough to take the great
city, and to the misfortune of Europe he died in 1355
leaving a realm extending from the Danube to the
<pb n='328'/><anchor id='Pg328'/>
pass of Thermopylae. But his young son Urosh was
soon assassinated, and the Servian Empire broke up
as rapidly as it had grown together. A dozen princes
were soon scrambling for the remnants of Stephen's
heritage.
</p>

<p>
The other allies whom John Cantacuzenus called in
were the Turks Amour and Orkhan, and on them he
depended far more than on the Servian. He took
over into Thrace a large body of Turkish horse, and
allowed them to harry the country-side and carry
away his subjects by thousands, to be sold in the
slave-markets of Smyrna and Broussa. But the
depth of John's degradation was reached when he
gave his daughter Theodora to Orkhan, to be immured
in the Turk's harem. Thrace was rapidly assuming
the aspect of a desert under the incursions of the
Ottoman mercenaries of Cantacuzenus, when after
six years of war the party of the Empress Anne
consented to recognize the usurper as the colleague
and guardian of the rightful heir. A hollow peace
was patched up, and the two Johns could take stock
of their dilapidated realm [1347]. The net result of
their civil war had been that Macedonia and Thessaly
were in Servian hands, and that Thrace was utterly
ruined by the Turks. There was nothing left that
could be called an empire; all that remained was
Constantinople and Adrianople, the town of Thessalonica
and the Byzantine province in the Peloponnesus.
Cantacuzenus certainly deserves a notable place by
the side of Isaac and Alexius Angelus, as the third of
the great destroyers of the Eastern Empire.
</p>

<p>
But his evil work was not yet done. For seven
<pb n='329'/><anchor id='Pg329'/>
years he ruled in conjunction with John Paleologus,
waging an unsuccessful war against Servia in the
hopes of winning back Dushan's conquests. But in
1354 the young emperor, having attained the age of
twenty-four, resolved to assert himself, and took arms
to dethrone his guardian. Cantacuzenus resisted,
and sent over to Asia for the troops of his son-in-law
Orkhan, who crossed into Thrace and drove the
adherents of the Paleologi out of several fortresses.
But a night surprise from the side of the sea put John
Paleologus in possession of Constantinople, and by a
fortunate chance he got Cantacuzenus himself into
his hands. The usurper was, in accordance with the
usual practice, tonsured and placed in a monastery;
by exceptional good fortune he was spared the loss
of his eyes, and was able to spend the remainder of
his life in writing a history of his own time.
</p>

<p>
But it was of little use to sweep away Cantacuzenus
while Orkhan's Turks were in Thrace. The Ottomans
had come as auxiliaries in the war, but they were
resolved to stop as principals. Suleiman, the son of
Orkhan, seized Gallipoli for himself, filled it with
Turkish families, and made it a permanent settlement.
This was the first Ottoman foothold in Europe, but it
was not long to remain isolated.
</p>

<p>
In 1359 Orkhan died, and his successor, Murad I.,
determined to cross over into Europe, and try the
fortune of his arms. John Paleologus was not a worse
man than his immediate predecessors on the throne,
but thanks to Cantacuzenus he had far less resources
than even they had possessed. Two years of fighting
sufficed to put Thrace in the hands of Murad from
<pb n='330'/><anchor id='Pg330'/>
sea to sea. A decisive battle in front of Adrianople
in 1361 was the finishing stroke, and the empire
became a mere head without a body; its last home-province
had been lopped away, and beyond the walls
of Constantinople no land acknowledged John V. as
sovereign save the district of Thessalonica and the
Peloponnesus.
</p>

<p>
Why Murad I. did not finish the task he had begun,
and take Constantinople itself, it is hard to discern.
Its walls were still formidable, and the Genoese and
Venetians could still protect it on the side of the sea.
But a siege pressed firmly to an end must at last have
triumphed over the mere inert resistance of stone and
mortar, unsupported by an adequate garrison within.
However, Murad preferred to press on against worthier
adversaries than the weak Paleologus, and spent his
life in incessant and successful wars with the Servians,
the Bulgarians, and the Seljouk Emirs of Southern
Asia Minor. In a reign of thirty years he extended
his borders to the Balkans on the north, and annexed
large tracts of Seljouk territory from his brother
Emirs in Asia Minor.
</p>

<p>
John Paleologus was his humble vassal and slave.
After a vain attempt to get help from the Pope, this
emperor without an empire resolved to make what
terms he could, and rejoiced when he found that
Murad was prepared to grant him peace. The Turk
was a hard master, and rejoiced in giving his vassal
unpalatable tasks. Best remembered among the tribulations
of John is the siege of Philadelphia. That
place had preserved a precarious independence after
all the other cities of Byzantine Asia fell into the
<pb n='331'/><anchor id='Pg331'/>
hands of the Turkish Emirs. Being far away in the
Lydian hills, it lost touch with Constantinople, and
had become a free town. Murad, wishing to subdue
it, compelled John V. and his son Manuel to march in
person against the last Christian stronghold in Asia.
The Emperor submitted to the degradation, and
Philadelphia surrendered when it saw the imperial
banner hoisted among the horse-tails of the Turkish
pashas above the camp of the besiegers. The humiliation
of the empire could go no further than when the
heir of Justinian and Basil Bulgaroktonos took the
field at the behest of an upstart Turkish Emir, in
order to extinguish the last relics of freedom among
his own compatriots.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='332'/><anchor id='Pg332'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>XXVI. The End Of A Long Tale. (1370-1453.)</head>

<p>
The tale of the last seventy-five years of the Byzantine
Empire is a mere piece of local history, and no
longer forms an important thread in the web of the
history of Christendom. Murad the Turk might have
taken Constantinople in 1370, without altering in any
very great measure the course of events in Eastern
Europe during the next century. For after 1370 the
empire ceased to exercise its old function of <q>bulwark
of Christendom against the Ottomite.</q> That
duty now fell to the Servians and Hungarians, who
continued to discharge it for the next hundred and
fifty years. The Paleologi, by their base subservience
to the Turk, protracted the life of the empire long after
all justification for its existence had disappeared.
</p>

<p>
If Constantinople had fallen in 1370, instead of
1453, there are only two ways in which European
history would have been somewhat modified. The
commercial resources of Genoa and Venice would
have been straitened before the appointed time, and
<pb n='333'/><anchor id='Pg333'/>
ere the Cape route to India enabled Europe to dispense
with the use of Constantinople as half-way house
to the East. And, we may add, the Renaissance
would have been shorn of some of its brilliance in the
next century, if the dispersion of the Greeks had
taken place before Italy was quite fitted to receive
them and turn their learning to account. But in
other respects it is hard to see that much harm would
have resulted from the fall of Constantinople in the
end of the fourteenth rather than the middle of the
fifteenth century.
</p>

<p>
While Murad I. was conquering the Servians and
Bulgarians, John Paleologus was dragging out a long
and unhonoured old age. His reign was protracted
for over half a century, but his later years were much
vexed by the undutiful behaviour of his children.
His son Andronicus twice rebelled against him, and
once succeeded in seizing the throne for a short space.
Andronicus allied himself unto Saoudji, a son of
Murad I., who plotted a similar treason against his
father the Emir. But Murad easily quelled the
rebellion, put out the eyes of his own son, and sent
Andronicus in chains to John II., bidding him to
follow his example. The Emperor did not dare to
disobey, and ordered his son to be blinded. But
the operation was so ineffectually performed that
Andronicus retained a measure of sight, and was even
able to venture on a second rebellion against his father.
</p>

<p>
In consequence of his heir's unnatural conduct, the
aged John determined to deprive him of his succession,
and when he died in 1391, he left the throne to
his second son Manuel, and not to his eldest born.
<pb n='334'/><anchor id='Pg334'/>
Manuel II. was above the average of the Paleologi,
and showed some signs of capacity, but of what use
was it to a prince whose sole dominions were Constantinople,
Thessalonica, and the Peloponnesus? He
had neither military strength nor money to justify
rebellion against the Turk, and could only wait on
the course of events.
</p>

<p>
There was, however, one moment in Manuel's life
at which the liberation of the empire from the
Ottoman suzerainty appeared possible and even
probable. In 1402, there burst into Asia Minor a
great horde of Tartars, under the celebrated conqueror
Timour [Tamerlane]. Sultan Bayezid, the
successor of Murad I., went forth to withstand the
invader. But at Angora in Galatia, he suffered a
crushing defeat, and the Ottoman Empire seemed
likely to perish by the sword. Bayezid was captured,
his trusty Janissaries were cut to pieces, his
light horsemen scattered to the winds. The Tartars
swarmed all over Asia Minor, occupied Broussa, the
Ottoman capital, and restored to their thrones all the
Seljouk Emirs whose dominions Murad I. had
annexed. Bayezid died in captivity, and his sons
began to fight over the remains of his empire: Prince
Suleiman seized Adrianople, Prince Eesa Nicaea, and
each declared himself Sultan.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/fig-40.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <head>Manuel Paleologus And His Family.
(<hi rend='italic'>From a Contemporary MS.</hi>)
(<hi rend='italic'>From "L'Art Byzantin." Par C. Bayet. Paris, Quantin, 1883.</hi>)</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
This was a rare opportunity for Manuel Paleologus:
the thieves had fallen out, and the rightful owner
might perchance come again to his own, if he played
his cards well. The control of the Straits was of
great importance to each of the Turkish pretenders,
so much so, that Manuel was able to sell his aid to
<pb n='335'/><anchor id='Pg335'/>
Suleiman for a heavy price. In order to keep Eesa
from crossing the water, the holder of the European
half of the Ottoman realm ceded to the Emperor
<pb n='336'/><anchor id='Pg336'/>
Thessalonica, the lower valley of the Strymon, the
coast of Thessaly, and all the seaports of the Black
Sea from the mouth of the Bosphorus up to Varna.
</p>

<p>
For a moment Manuel once more ruled what might
in courtesy be called an empire, and so long as the
Ottomans were occupied in civil war he contrived to
retain his gains. The strife of the sons of Bayezid
lasted ten years: Suleiman was slain by his brother
Musa, Eesa by his brother Mohammed, and the two
supplanters continued the war. By all Oriental
analogies their empire ought to have fallen to pieces,
for it is very much easier to build up a new state in
the East than to keep together an old one which is
breaking asunder. But Mohammed, the youngest
of the sons of Bayezid, was a man of genius: he
triumphed over the last of his brothers, and united all
the remnants of the Ottoman realm that remained.
Much had been lost to the Seljouk Emirs in Asia
Minor, and to the Servians and Manuel Paleologus in
Europe, but the rest was back in Mohammed's hands
by <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1421. Manuel had very luckily cast in his lot
with Mohammed during the later years of the Turkish
civil war, and his ally let him enjoy the dominions he
had recovered by his original treaty with Suleiman in
1403.
</p>

<p>
Between 1402 and 1421, Europe had an unparalleled
opportunity to rid herself of the Ottomans. Unfortunately
it was not taken. Sigismund, king of
Hungary, and at the same time Emperor, was the
sovereign on whom the duty of leading the attack
ought to have fallen. But Sigismund was now
engaged in his great struggle with the Hussites in
<pb n='337'/><anchor id='Pg337'/>
Bohemia. This wretched religious war directed the
strength of Hungary northward when it was wanted
in the south. Without such a power to back them
the Servians, though they recovered their own liberty
as a result of the battle of Angora, could do nothing
towards driving the Turks from the Balkans. There
was never any sympathy between Serb and Magyar,
and save under the direct pressure of fear of a Moslem
invasion they would not act together. The Hungarian
kings had always laid claim to a suzerainty over the
crown of Servia, and from time to time tried to convert
their neighbours to Roman Catholicism by force
of arms. Hence there was no love lost between them,
and a crusade to expel the Turks was never concerted.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/fig-41.png' rend='width: 60%'>
    <head>Arabesque Design From A Byzantine MS.
(<hi rend='italic'>From "L'Art Byzantin." Par Charles Bayet. Paris, Quantin, 1883.</hi>)</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Mahomet the Unifier died in 1421, and evil days
at once set in for Constantinople and for Christendom,
when his ambitious son Murad II. came to the throne.
Manuel Paleologus was one of the first to feel the
change in the times. He tried to make trouble for
Murad, by supporting against him two claimants to the
Ottoman Sultanate, each named Mustapha, one the
uncle, the other the brother of the new ruler. This
drew down on the empire the fate which had been
delayed since 1370: the Sultan declared war on
Manuel, took one after another all the fortresses which
had been recovered by the peace of 1403, and finally
laid siege to Constantinople. For the last time the
walls of the city proved strong enough to repulse an
assault. Though Murad levelled against them
cannon, then seen for the first time in the East, built
movable towers to shelter his troops, and launched
his terrible Janissaries to the assault, he could not
<pb n='339'/><anchor id='Pg339'/>
succeed. The report of a miraculous vision of the
Virgin, who vouchsafed to reveal herself as the
defender of the city, encouraged the Greeks to resist
with a better spirit than might have been expected.
At last the pretender Mustapha, whom Manuel had
supplied with money to cause a revolt against his
brother, began to stir up such trouble in Asia Minor,
that the Sultan determined to raise the siege and
march against him. He granted Manuel peace, on
the condition that he ceded all his dominions save
the cities of Constantinople and Thessalonica and
the Peloponnesian province. Thus the empire once
more sank back into a state of vassalage to the
Ottomans [1422].
</p>

<p>
Manuel II. died three years after, at the age of
seventy-seven. He was the last sovereign of Constantinople
who won even a transient smile from
fortune. The tale of the last thirty years of the
empire is one of unredeemed gloom.
</p>

<p>
To Manuel succeeded his son John VI., whose
whole reign was passed in peace, without an attempt
to shake off the Turkish yoke; such an attempt
indeed would have been hopeless, unless backed by
aid from without. As Manuel II. once observed,
<q>the empire now requires a bailiff not a statesman to
rule it.</q> Treaties, wars, and alliances were not for
him: all that he could do was to try to save a little
money, and to keep his walls in good repair, and even
these humble tasks were not always feasible.
</p>

<p>
All the descriptions of Constantinople in the
fifteenth century, whether written by Greek natives
or by Western travellers, bear witness to a state of
<pb n='340'/><anchor id='Pg340'/>
exhaustion and debility which make us wonder that
the empire did not collapse sooner. The country outside
the walls was a desert. Within them more than
half the ground was unoccupied, and covered only by
ruins which testified to ancient magnificence. The
great palace by the Augustaeum, which sheltered so
many generations of emperors, had grown so dilapidated
that the Paleologi dwelt in a mere corner of it.
Part of the porticoes of St. Sophia had fallen down,
and the Greeks could not afford to repair even the
greatest sanctuary of their faith. The population of
the city had shrunk to about a hundred thousand
souls, most of them dwelling in great poverty. Such
commerce and wealth as still survived in Constantinople
had passed almost entirely into the hands of
the Italians of Genoa and Venice, whose fortified
factories at Galata and Pera now contained the bulk
of the wares that passed through the city. The
military strength of the empire was composed of
about four thousand mercenary troops, of whom many
were Franks and hardly any were born subjects of
the empire. The splendid court, which had once been
the wonder of East and West, had shrunk to such
modest dimensions that a Burgundian traveller noted
with surprise that no more than eight attendants
accompanied the empress when she went in state to
worship in St. Sophia.<note place='foot'>See Bertrandon de la Broquière quoted in Finlay, vol. iii. p. 493,
a very interesting passage.</note>
</p>

<p>
John VI., in spite of the caution with which he
avoided all action, was destined to see the empire lose
its most important possession beyond the walls of
<pb n='341'/><anchor id='Pg341'/>
Constantinople. His brother Andronicus, governor
of Thessalonica, traitorously sold that city to the
Venetians for 50,000 zecchins. The Sultan, incensed
at a transfer of Greek territory having taken place
without his permission, pounced down on the place,
expelled the Venetians and annexed Thessalonica to
the Ottoman Empire [1430].
</p>

<p>
The chief feature of the reign of the last John
Paleologus was his attempt to win aid for the empire
by enlisting sympathy in Western Europe. He
determined to conform to Roman Catholicism and
to throw himself on the generosity of the Pope.
Accordingly he betook himself to Italy in 1438, with
the Patriarch of Constantinople and many bishops in
his train. He appeared at the Councils of Ferrara and
Florence, and was solemnly received into the Roman
Church in the Florentine Duomo, on July 6, 1439.
It had apparently escaped John's notice that
Eugenius IV., the pope of his own day, was a very
different personage from the great pontiffs of the
eleventh and twelfth centuries, who were able to
depose sovereigns and send forth Crusades at their
good pleasure. Since the Great Schism the papacy
had been hopelessly discredited in Christendom.
Eugenius IV. was engaged in waging a defensive
war against the Council of Basle, which was attempting
to depose him, and had little thought or power
to spend on aiding the Eastern Christians. All that
John could get from him was a sum of money and a
body of three hundred mercenary troops. This was a
poor return for his journey and conversion.
</p>

<p>
Only one thing of importance was accomplished by
<pb n='342'/><anchor id='Pg342'/>
the apostasy of the Emperor&mdash;the outbreak of a
venomous ecclesiastical struggle at Constantinople
between the conformists who had taken the oath at
Florence, and the bulk of the clergy, who disowned
the treaty of union. John was practically boycotted
by the majority of his subjects; the Orthodox priests
ceased to pray for him, and the populace refused to
enter St. Sophia again, when it had been profaned by
the celebration of the Roman Mass. The opinion of
the majority of the Greeks was summed up in the
exclamation of the Grand-Duke John Notaras&mdash;<q>Better
the turban of the Turk in Constantinople
than the Pope's Tiara.</q>
</p>

<p>
The last years of the reign of John VI. coincided
with the great campaigns of Huniades and Ladislas
of Poland against the Turks. For a moment it
seemed as if the gallant king of Poland and Hungary,
backed by his great Warden of the Marches, might
restore the Balkan lands to Christendom. They
thrust Murad II. back over the Balkans, and appeared
in triumph at Sophia. But the fatal battle of Varna
[1444] ended the career of King Ladislas in an
untimely death, and after that fight the Ottomans
were obviously fated to accomplish their destiny
without a check. John Paleologus watched the
struggle without movement if not without concern.
He was too cautious to stir a finger to aid the
Hungarians, for he knew that if he once offended the
Sultan his days would be numbered.
</p>

<p>
John VI. passed away in 1448, and Sultan Murad
in 1451. The one was succeeded by his brother
Constantine, the last Christian sovereign of Byzantium,
<pb n='343'/><anchor id='Pg343'/>
the other by his young son Mohammed the Conqueror.
Constantine was a Romanist like his elder brother,
and was therefore treated with great suspicion and
coolness by his handful of subjects. He was the best
man that the house of Paleologus had ever reared,
brave, pious, generous, and forgiving. Like King
Hosea of Israel, <q>he did not evil as the kings that
were before him,</q> yet was destined to bear the penalty
for all the sins and follies of his long line of predecessors.
</p>

<p>
Mohammed II., the most commanding personality
among the whole race of Ottoman Sultans, set his
heart from the first on seizing Constantinople, the
natural centre of his empire, and making it his capital.
Some excuse had to be found for falling on his vassal:
the one that he chose was a rather unwise request
which Constantine had made. There dwelt at Constantinople
a Turkish prince of the royal house named
Orkhan, for whom Mohammed paid a considerable
subsidy, on condition that he was kept out of the way
of mischief and plotting. Some unhappy inspiration impelled
Constantine to ask for an increase in the subsidy,
and to hint that Orkhan had claims to the Sultanate.
This was excuse enough for Mohammed: without
taking the trouble to declare war he sent out troops and
engineers, and began to erect forts on Greek soil, only
four miles away from Constantinople, at the narrowest
point of the Bosphorus, so as to block the approach
to the city from the Black Sea. The Emperor did
not dare to remonstrate, but when the Turks began
to pull down a much-venerated church, in order to
utilize its stones in the new fort, a few Greeks took
<pb n='344'/><anchor id='Pg344'/>
arms and drove the masons away. They were at
once cut down by the Turkish guards: Constantine
demanded redress, and then Mohammed, having
fairly picked his wolf-and-lamb quarrel with his unfortunate
vassal, commenced open hostilities [Autumn
1452].
</p>

<p>
Turkish light troops at once appeared to blockade the
city while the Sultan began to collect a great train
of cannon at Adrianople, and to build a large fleet of
war galleys in the ports of Asia: the siege was to begin
in the ensuing spring.
</p>

<p>
The empire was now in its death agony, and Constantine
recognized the fact. He spent the winter in
making frantic appeals to the Pope and the Italian
naval powers to save him from destruction. Nicholas
V. was willing enough to help; now that the Emperor
was a convert to Catholicism something must be done
to aid him. But all that the Pope could send was a
cardinal, a moderate sum of money, and a few hundred
soldiers of fortune hastily hired in Italy. Venice and
Genoa could have done much more, but they had so
often heard the cry of <q>Wolf</q> raised that they did
not realize the danger to their Eastern trade at its
true extent. From Genoa, Giovanni Giustiniani
brought no more than two galleys and three hundred
men. Venice did even less, only commissioning the
bailiff of its factory at Galata to arm such able-bodied
Venetians as were with him for the protection of the
city. Altogether the Franks, counting both trained
mercenaries and armed burghers, who co-operated in
the defence of Constantinople, were not more than
three thousand strong. Yet either Genoa or Venice
<pb n='345'/><anchor id='Pg345'/>
could have thrown a hundred galleys and twenty
thousand men into the scale if they had chosen.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/fig-42.png' rend='width: 80%'>
    <head>Details Of St. Sophia.</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Constantine's own troops were about four thousand
strong, but he hoped to recruit them by a general
levy of the male population of the city. He issued
a passionate appeal to his subjects to join in saving
the holy city, the centre of Eastern Christendom.
But the Greeks only remembered that he was an
apostate, who had foresworn the faith of his fathers
and done homage to the Pope. They stood aside in
sullen apathy, and from the whole population of the
city only two thousand volunteers were enlisted.
<pb n='346'/><anchor id='Pg346'/>
Theological bitterness led the blind multitude to cry
with Notaras that it preferred the Turk to the Roman.
</p>

<p>
In April, 1453, the young Sultan, with seventy
thousand picked troops at his back, laid formal siege
to the city on the land side, while a fleet of several
hundred war galleys beset the Bosphorus. The end
could not be for a moment doubtful; nine thousand
men could not hope to defend the vast circuit of the
land and sea-wall against a veteran army urged on
by a young and fiery general. Mohammed set his
cannon to play on the walls, and it was soon seen
that the tough old Roman mortar and stone that had
blunted the siege engines of so many foes could not
resist the force of gunpowder. The Sultan's artillery
was rude, but it was heavy and numerous; ere long
the walls began to come down in flakes, and breaches
commenced to show themselves in several places.
</p>

<p>
Constantine XIII. and his second in command, the
Genoese Giustiniani, did all that brave and skilful men
might, in protracting the siege. They led sorties,
organized attacks by water on the Turkish fleet, and
endeavoured to drive off the siege artillery of the
enemy by a counter fire of cannon. But it was found
that the old walls were too narrow to bear the guns,
and where any were hoisted up and brought to bear,
their recoil shook the fabric in such a dangerous way
that the fire was soon obliged to cease.
</p>

<p>
At sea the Christians won one great success, when
four galleys from the Aegean forced their way in
through the whole Turkish fleet, and reached the
Golden Horn in safety, after sinking many of their
assailants. But the Turks had as great a numerical
<pb n='347'/><anchor id='Pg347'/>
superiority on the water as on land, and the inevitable
could only be delayed. Mohammed even succeeded
in getting control of the harbour of the city,
above its mouth, by dragging light galleys on rollers
over the neck of land between the Bosphorus and the
Golden Horn, and launching them in the inland
waters just above Galata. Thus the inner, as well as
the outer, sea-face of the city was beset by enemies.
</p>

<p>
The end came on May 29, 1453. The Sultan had
opened several practicable breaches, of which the
chief lay in the north-west angle of the city by the
gate of St. Romanus, where two whole towers and
the curtain between them had been battered down
and choked the ditch. The storm was obviously at
hand, and the doomed Emperor was obliged to face
his fate. Greek historians dwelt with loving sorrow
on the last hours of the unfortunate prince. He left
the breach at midnight, partook of the sacrament
according to the Latin rite in St. Sophia, and snatched
a few hours of troubled sleep in his half-ruined palace.
Next morning, with the dawn, he rose to ride back to the
post of danger. His ministers and attendants crowded
round his horse as he started on what all knew to be
his last journey. Looking steadfastly on them he
prayed one and all to pardon him for any offence that
he might wittingly or unwittingly have committed
against any man. The crowd answered with sobs
and wails, and with the sounds of woe ringing in his
ears Constantine rode slowly off to meet his death.
</p>

<p>
The assault commenced at dawn; three main
attacks and several secondary ones were directed
against weak spots in the wall. But the chief stress
<pb n='348'/><anchor id='Pg348'/>
was on the great breach by the gate of St. Romanus.
There the Emperor himself and Giustiniani at his side
stood in the midst of the yawning gap with their best
men around them, and opposed a barrier of steel to
the oncoming assailants. Twelve thousand Janissaries,
sabre in hand, formed successive columns of attack;
as soon as one was beaten off another delivered its
assault. They fell by hundreds before the swords of
the mailed men in the breach, for their felt caps and
unarmoured bodies were easy marks for the ponderous
weapons of the fifteenth century. But the ranks of
the defenders grew thin and weary; Giustiniani was
wounded in the face by an arrow, and taken on board
his galley to die. Constantine at last stood almost
alone in the breach, and a forlorn hope of Janissaries
headed by one Hassan of Ulubad, whom Turkish
chroniclers delight to honour, at last forced their way
over the wall. The Emperor and his companions
were trodden under foot, and the victorious army
rushed into the desolate streets of Constantinople,
seeking in vain for foes to fight. The Greeks, half
expecting that God would interfere to save the queen
of Christian cities by a miracle, had crowded into the
churches, and were passing the fatal hour in frantic
prayer! The shouts of the victorious enemy soon
showed them how the day had gone, and the worshippers
were dragged out in crowds, to be claimed as
slaves and divided among the conquerors.
</p>

<p>
Mohammed II. rode through the breach after his
men, and descended into the city, scanning from
within the streets that so many Eastern conquerors
had in vain desired to see. He bade his men search
<pb n='349'/><anchor id='Pg349'/>
for the Emperor, and the corpse of Constantine was
found at last beneath a heap of slain, so gashed and
mauled that it was only identified by the golden
eagles on his mail shoes. The Turk struck off his
head, and sent it round their chief cities as a token of
triumph. Riding through the hippodrome towards
St. Sophia, Mohammed noted the Delphic tripod with
its three snakes,<note place='foot'>See pp. <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref>, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>.</note> standing where Constantine the
Great had placed it eleven hundred years before.
Either because the menacing heads of the serpents
provoked him, or merely because he wished to try the
strength of his arm, the Sultan rose in his stirrups
and smote away the jaws of the nearest snake with
one blow of his mace. There was something typical
in the deed though Mohammed knew it not. He had
defaced the monument of the first great victory of the
West over the East. He, the successor in spirit not
only of Xerxes but of Chosroës and Moslemah and
many another Oriental potentate, who had failed
where he succeeded, could not better signalize the end
of Greek freedom than by dealing a scornful blow at
that ancient memorial, erected in the first days of
Grecian greatness, to celebrate the turning back of
the Persians on the field of Plataea.
</p>

<p>
At last the Sultan came to St. Sophia, where the
crowd of wailing captives was being divided among
his soldiery. He rode in at the eastern door, and
bade a mollah ascend the pulpit and repeat there the
formula of the Moslem faith. So the cry that God
was great and Mohammed his prophet rang through
<pb n='350'/><anchor id='Pg350'/>
the dome where thirty generations of patriarchs had
celebrated the Holy Mysteries, and all Europe and
Asia knew the end was come of the longest tale of
Empire that Christendom has yet seen.
</p>

<p>
Finis.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='351'/><anchor id='Pg351'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Table Of Emperors.</head>

<lg>
<l>Arcadius, 395-408</l>
<l>Theodosius II., 408-450</l>
<l>Marcianus, 450-457</l>
<l>Leo I., 457-474</l>
<l>Zeno, 474-491</l>
<l>Anastasius I., 491-518</l>
<l>Justinus I., 518-527</l>
<l>Justinianus I., 527-565</l>
<l>Justinus II., 565-578</l>
<l>Tiberius II., Constantinus, 578-582</l>
<l>Mauricius, 582-602</l>
<l>Phocas, 602-610</l>
<l>Heraclius, 610-641</l>
<l>Heraclius Constantinus and Heracleonas, 641-2</l>
<l>Constans II., 642-668</l>
<l>Constantine IV., 668-685</l>
<l>Justinian II., 685-695</l>
<l>Leontius, 695-697</l>
<l>Tiberius III., Apsimarus, 697-705</l>
<l>Justinian II. (restored), 705-711</l>
<l>Philippicus, 711-713</l>
<l>Anastasius II., Artemius, 713-715</l>
<l>Theodosius III., 715-717</l>
<l>Leo III., the Isaurian, 717-740</l>
<l>Constantine V., Copronymus, 740-775</l>
<l>Leo IV., 775-779</l>
<l>Constantine VI., 779-797</l>
<l>Irene, 797-802</l>
<l>Nicephorus I., 802-811</l>
<l>Stauracius, 811</l>
<l>Michael I., Rhangabe, 811-813</l>
<l>Leo V., the Armenian, 813-820</l>
<l>Michael II., the Amorian, 820-829</l>
<l>Theophilus, 829-842</l>
<l>Michael III., 842-867</l>
<l>Basil I., the Macedonian, 867-886</l>
<l>Leo VI., the Wise, 886-912</l>
<l>Constantine VII., Porphyrogenitus, 912-958</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>[Co-regent Emperors&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Alexander, 912-913</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Romanus I., Lecapenus, 919-945]</l>
<l>Romanus II., 958-963</l>
<l>Basil II., Bulgaroktonos, 963-1025</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>[Co-regent Emperors&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Nicephorus II., Phocas, 963-969</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>John I., Zimisces, 969-976]</l>
<l>Constantine VIII., 1025-28</l>
<l>Romanus III., Argyrus, 1028-34</l>
<l>Michael IV., the Paphlagonian, 1034-42</l>
<l>Michael V., 1042</l>
<l>Constantine IX., Monomachus, 1042-55</l>
<l>Theodora, 1055-57</l>
<l>Michael VI., Stratioticus, 1056-57</l>
<pb n='352'/><anchor id='Pg352'/>
<l>Isaac I., Comnenus, 1057-59</l>
<l>Constantine X., Ducas, 1059-67</l>
<l>Michael VII., Ducas, 1067-78</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>[Co-regent Emperor&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Romanus IV., Diogenes, 1067-71]</l>
<l>Nicephorus III., Botaniates, 1078-81</l>
<l>Alexius I., Comnenus, 1081-1118</l>
<l>John II., Comnenus, 1118-43</l>
<l>Manuel I., Comnenus, 1143-80</l>
<l>Alexius II., Comnenus, 1180-83</l>
<l>Andronicus I., Comnenus, 1183-85</l>
<l>Isaac II., Angelus, 1185-95</l>
<l>Alexius III., Angelus, 1195-1203</l>
<l>Isaac II. (restored), 1203-4</l>
<l>Alexius V., Ducas, 1204</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Latin Emperors.</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l>Baldwin I., 1204-5</l>
<l>Henry, 1205-16</l>
<l>Peter, 1217-19</l>
<l>Robert, 1219-28</l>
<l>Baldwin II., 1228-61</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Nicaean Emperors.</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l>Theodore I., Lascaris, 1204-22</l>
<l>John III., Ducas, 1222-54</l>
<l>Theodore II., Ducas, 1254-59</l>
<l>John IV., Ducas, 1259-60</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Empire Restored.</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l>Michael VIII., Paleologus, 1260-82</l>
<l>Andronicus II., Paleologus, 1282-1328</l>
<l>Andronicus III., Paleologus, 1328-41</l>
<l>John V., Paleologus, 1341-91</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>[Co-regent&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>John VI., Cantacuzenus, 1347-54]</l>
<l>Manuel II., 1391-1425</l>
<l>John VII., 1425-48</l>
<l>Constantine XI., 1448-53</l>
</lg>

</div>

<pb n='353'/><anchor id='Pg353'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Index.</head>

<lg>
<l>Abdalmelik, the Caliph, wars of, with Justinian II., <ref target='Pg174'>174-6</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abubekr, the Caliph, wars of, with Heraclius, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Achaia, Frank principality of, <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Acroinon, battle of, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adana, taken by Nicephorus Phocas, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adrianople, battle of, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>besieged by the Goths, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>captured by the Turks, <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Africa, conquered by Belisarius, <ref target='Pg084'>84-5</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>overrun by the Saracens, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aijnadin, battle of, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alaric the Goth, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wars with Stilicho, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>departs to Italy, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alaeddin, Sultan of the Seljouks, <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alboin the Lombard invades and conquers Italy, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aleppo, Emirate of, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>attacked by Nicephorus Phocas, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tributary to the empire, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alexander, emperor-regent, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alexandria, stormed by the Arabs, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-alexius-i'/>
<l>Alexius I. (Comnenus), usurpation of, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wars with the Normans, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conquests of in Asia Minor, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>commercial policy of, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alexius II. (Comnenus), short reign and murder of, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-alexius-iii'/>
<l>Alexius III. (Angelus), usurpation of, <ref target='Pg278'>278</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>attacked by the Crusaders, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>flies, <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alexius IV. (Angelus), takes refuge in Germany, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>persuades the Crusaders, <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>made emperor, <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>murdered, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-alexius-v'/>
<l>Alexius V. (Ducas), murders Alexius IV., <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defends Constantinople, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slain, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alexius Comnenus, emperor of Trebizond, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alp Arslan, Sultan of the Seljouk Turks, attacks the empire, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defeats Romanus IV., <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amalasuntha, Gothic queen, murdered, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amalphi, commerce of, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amorium, stormed by the Saracens, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amour, Turkish Emir, <ref target='Pg327'>327</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amrou conquers Egypt, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anastasius I., reign of, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anastasius II., usurpation of, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anatolic theme, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Andreas murders Constans II., <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-andronicus-i'/>
<l>Andronicus I. (Comnenus), crimes and fall of, <ref target='Pg272'>272-3</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-andronicus-ii'/>
<l>Andronicus II. (Paleologus), reign of, <ref target='Pg315'>315-20</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-andronicus-iii'/>
<l>Andronicus III. (Paleologus), reign of, <ref target='Pg321'>321-2</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Angelus, house of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='index-isaac-ii'>Isaac II.</ref> <ref target='index-alexius-iii'>Alexius III.</ref> and Theodore of Epirus</l>
</lg>

<pb n='354'/><anchor id='Pg354'/>

<lg>
<l>Angora, battle of, <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ani, taken by the Turks, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anthemius, prime minister of Theodosius II., <ref target='Pg054'>54-5</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anthemius, architect of St. Sophia, <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anne of Savoy, empress-regent, <ref target='Pg326'>326</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antioch, taken by the Persians, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taken a second time, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>stormed by the Saracens, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>retaken by Nicephorus Phocas, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>lost to the Turks, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>besieged by the Crusaders, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tributary to the Comneni, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antioch-on-Maeander, battle of, <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antonia, wife of Belisarius, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apsimarus, Tiberius, emperor, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>executed, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arabs, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='index-saracens'>Saracens</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arcadius, reign of, <ref target='Pg047'>47-54</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his dealings with the Goths, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>quarrels with Chrysostom, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Armenia, conquered by the Byzantines, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>overrun by the Turks, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Army, reformed by Leo and Zeno, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>description of, in tenth century, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Artemius Anastasius, reign of, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Art, decay and revival of, <ref target='Pg222'>222-4</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aspar, executed by Leo I., <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Athalaric, Gothic king, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Athanarich, Gothic king, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>visits Constantinople, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Athens, early Byzantines at war with, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>schools of, closed by Justinian, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Frank duchy of, <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conquered by the <q>Grand Company,</q> <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Attila, king of the Huns, wars of with the empire, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Augustaeum, description of the, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Avars, invasions of, the <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>war of, with Heraclius, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>besiege Constantinople, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baanes, rebel in Syria, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baduila, Gothic king, victories of, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>takes Rome, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slain in battle, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baldwin I., emperor, his character,<ref target='Pg281'>281</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>crowned, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slain by the Bulgarians, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baldwin II., reign of, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his travels, <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expelled from Constantinople, <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bardas Caesar, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>murdered by Michael III., <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bari, taken by the Normans, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Basil I., made Caesar, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>assassinates Michael III., <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>laws of, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Basil II., ascends the throne, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>assumes the full power, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his Bulgarian victories, <ref target='Pg241'>241-3</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>campaigns in Asia, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dies, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bayezid, Turkish Sultan, <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Belisarius, Persian victories of, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>quells the <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Nika</foreign> riots, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conquers Africa, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>takes Palermo, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>takes Rome, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>takes Ravenna, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>recalled, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>acts against Persia, <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defeats the Huns, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>disgraced, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beneventum, Lombard duchy of, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wars of with Constans II., <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Black Sea, Greek trade with, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Blues and Greens,</q> Circus factions, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>, <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>great riot of, against Justinian, <ref target='Pg076'>76-7</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>armed by Maurice, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bohemund the Norman, wars of with Alexius I., <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-boniface'/>
<l>Boniface of Montserrat, <ref target='Pg281'>281-2</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>made king of Thessalonica, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slain in battle, <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bosphorus, the, <ref target='Pg001'>1-2</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bostra, stormed by the Saracens, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Branas, Alexius, rebellion of, <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brienne, house of, at Athens, <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expelled by the <q>Grand Company,</q> <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Broussa, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='index-prusa'>Prusa</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bucellarian Theme, <ref target='Pg167'>167-8</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buhawides, Persian dynasty, <ref target='Pg226'>226-7</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bulgarians, invade and settle in
<pb n='355'/><anchor id='Pg355'/>
Moesia, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defeated by Justinian II., <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>aid Justinian, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defeat the Saracens, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at war with Constantine V., <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defeat Constantine VI., <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slay Nicephorus I., <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>besiege Constantinople, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>routed by Leo V., <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defeat Leo VI, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conquered by the Russians, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conquered by Basil II., <ref target='Pg241'>241-3</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>revolt against Isaac II., <ref target='Pg276'>276-7</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slay Baldwin I., <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conquests of, <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>subdued by the Turks, <ref target='Pg330'>330</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burtzes storms Antioch, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Byzantium, founded, <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>early history of, <ref target='Pg002'>2-8</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>under the Romans, <ref target='Pg009'>9-12</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>chosen as Constantine's capital, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>see afterwards under</hi> <ref target='index-constantinople'>Constantinople</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Candia taken by Nicephorus Phocas, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cantacuzenus, John, usurpation of, <ref target='Pg325'>325-8</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caracalla, grants privileges to Byzantium, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carthage, taken by Belisarius, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taken by the Saracens, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cassiodorus, his work in literary copying, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chalcedon, founded. <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taken by the Persians, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Champlitte, William of, founds principality of Achaia, <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Charles the Great crowned emperor, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cherson. Justinian II. at, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacked, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chosroës I., king of Persia, wars of, with Justinian, <ref target='Pg072'>72-4</ref>, <ref target='Pg090'>90-100</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chosroës II.. wars with Phocas and Heraclius, <ref target='Pg120'>120-135</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death of, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chosroantiocheia, foundation of, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christianity, influence of, on the empire and society, <ref target='Pg145'>145-149</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chrysostom, <hi rend='italic'>see under</hi> <ref target='index-john-chrysostom'>John Chrysostom</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cilicia, conquered by Nicephorus Phocas, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>lost to the Turks, <ref target='Pg235'>236</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reconquered by the Comneni, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Column, of the Hippodrome, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Constantine, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Commerce, centralization of, at Constantinople, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>decline of, under the Comneni, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>effects of Fourth Crusade on, <ref target='Pg310'>310</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Comnena, Anna, writes her father's life, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Comnenus, <hi rend='italic'>see under</hi> <ref target='index-alexius-i'>Alexius</ref>, <ref target='index-john-ii'>John</ref>, <ref target='index-andronicus-i'>Andronicus</ref>, <ref target='index-manuel-i'>Manuel</ref>, <ref target='index-david'>David</ref>, <ref target='index-isaac-i'>Isaac</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-conrad'/>
<l>Conrad of Montserrat defeats Branas, <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Constans II., reign of, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wars of with the Saracens, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>murdered, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Constantine I., besieges Byzantium, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>master of the world, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>seeks a capital, <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>founds Constantinople, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Constantine III., defeated by the Saracens, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>short reign of, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Constantine IV. (Pogonatus), wars of with the Saracens, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defeats Moawiah, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>holds the Council of Constantinople, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Constantine V. (Copronymus), wars of, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>persecutes the Image-worshippers, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Constantine VI., reign of, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>blinded by his mother, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Constantine VII. (Porphyrogenitus), reign of, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>literary works of, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref>, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Constantine VIII., reign of, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Constantine IX. (Monomachus), reign of, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-constantine-x'/>
<l>Constantine X. (Ducas), reign of, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref>, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-constantine-xi'/>
<l>Constantine XI. (Paleologus), accession of, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>attacked by the Turks, <ref target='Pg344'>344</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>last hours of, <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death of, <ref target='Pg348'>348</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-constantinople'/>
<l>Constantinople founded by Constantine,
<pb n='356'/><anchor id='Pg356'/>
<ref target='Pg018'>18</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>topography of, <ref target='Pg019'>19-29</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>besieged by the Goths, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>street fighting in, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>besieged by Avars and Persians, <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref>, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>besieged for the first time by the Saracens, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>besieged for the second time by the Saracens, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>besieged by Bulgarians, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>commercial importance of, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>riots in, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Crusaders at, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taken by the Franks and Venetians, <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>stormed and sacked a second time, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>devastation of, by the Latins, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>besieged by John Ducas, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>recovered by the Greeks, <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taken by John Paleologus, <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>besieged by Murad II., <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>last siege of, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taken by the Turks, <ref target='Pg348'>348</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Corippus, poem of, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Council of Constantinople, under Constantine IV., <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>under Constantine V., <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>under Leo V., <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Council of Florence, John VI. at, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Courtenay, house of at Constantinople, <ref target='Pg300'>300</ref>, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crete, conquered by the Saracens, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>recovered by Nicephorus Phocas, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taken by the Venetians, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cross, the Holy, captured by the Persians, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>recovered by Heraclius, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>removed to Constantinople, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crumn, king of Bulgaria, defeats Nicephorus I., <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>besieges Constantinople, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crusaders, their dealings with Alexius I., <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref>, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>enter Syria, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the Fourth Crusade, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conquer Constantinople, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ctesiphon, Heraclius at, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cyprus, monks banished to, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>recovered by Nicephorus Phocas, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>seized by Isaac Comnenus, <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taken by Richard I. of England, <ref target='Pg278'>278</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Damascus, taken by the Persians, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taken by the Saracens, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dandolo, Henry, doge of Venice, <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref>, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at the storm of Constantinople, <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref>, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dara taken in the Persian wars, <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dastagerd taken by Heraclius, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-david'/>
<l>David Comnenus defeated by Theodore I., <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Delphic tripod, the, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mutilated by Mahomet II., <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Delphic oracle, the, orders foundation of Byzantium, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Digenes Akritas, epic of, <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diocletian makes Nicomedia his capital, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diogenes, Romanus, reign of, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defeated at Manzikert, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slain, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ducas, <hi rend='italic'>see under</hi> <ref target='index-constantine-x'>Constantine X.</ref>, <ref target='index-michael-vii'>Michael VII.</ref>, <ref target='index-john-iii'>John III.</ref>, <ref target='index-theodore-ii'>Theodore II.</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Durazzo, battle of, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dushan, Stephen, king of Servia, conquests of, <ref target='Pg327'>327</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ecloga, the, Leo III.'s code of laws, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eesa, Sultan, <ref target='Pg334'>334-5</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Egypt, conquered by the Persians, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conquered by the Saracens, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>separated from the Caliphate, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eikasia, story of, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Emesa, taken by the Saracens, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taken by Nicephorus Phocas, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Epirus, the despotate of, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref>, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref>, <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref>, <ref target='Pg327'>327</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ertogrul, the Turk, <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eudocia (Athenaïs), wife of Theodosius II., her disgrace, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eudocia, wife of Romanus Diogenes, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eudoxia, Ælia, wife of Arcadius, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='357'/><anchor id='Pg357'/>

<lg>
<l>Eugenius IV., pope, treaty of, with John VI., <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Euphrosyne, wife of Michael the Amorian, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eutropius, minister of Arcadius, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>protected by Chrysostom, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Euphemius, rebel in Sicily, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Exarchate, of Ravenna, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conquered by the Lombards, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fatimite dynasty in Egypt, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ferrara, John VI. at Council of, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flaccilla, benevolence of, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Florence. Council of, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Franks, threaten Italy, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>summoned by Witiges, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>protect the Papacy, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fritigern, Gothic ruler, <ref target='Pg035'>35-7</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>victory of over Valens, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fravitta defeats Gainas, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gainas, minister of Arcadius, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rebellion of, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>; slain, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gallienus, Byzantium destroyed by, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gallipoli seized by the Turks, <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ganzaca burnt by Heraclius, <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gelimer, king of the Vandals, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defeated and captured, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Genoa, rise of, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>trade of, with the East, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>allied to Michael Paleologus, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sends aid to Constantine XI., <ref target='Pg344'>344</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>George the Alan, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>George of Pisidia, poems of, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Giustiniani, John, defends Constantinople, <ref target='Pg344'>344-8</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Godfrey of Bouillon, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goths, early history of, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cross the Danube, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defeat Valens, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>besiege Constantinople, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>submit to Theodosius, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Visigoths under Alaric, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>quit the East, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Ostrogoths under Theodoric at war with Zeno, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>invade Italy, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kingdom of, attacked by Belisarius, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wars of, with Justinian, <ref target='Pg088'>88-94</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defeated and destroyed, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Grand Company,</q> the, hired by Andronicus II., <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ravage Thrace, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conquer Athens, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Greece, invaded by the Goths, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>overrun by the Slavs, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conquered by the Crusaders, <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref>, <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Greek fire, invented, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used by the Byzantine fleet, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gregory the Great, Pope, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guiscard, Robert, wars of, with Alexius I., <ref target='Pg259'>259-61</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Haroun-al-Raschid, wars of, with Nicephorus I., <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Helena, mother of Constantine I., <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hellas, theme of, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>revolts against Leo III., <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Henry of Flanders, Emperor, <ref target='Pg295'>295-6</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Henry VI. of Swabia, Emperor of the West, <ref target='Pg278'>278</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heracleonas, reign and fall of, <ref target='Pg165'>165-6</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heraclius the Elder, rebellion of, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heraclius I., sails against Constantinople, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slays Phocas, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>disasters of the Persian War, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his Crusade, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>victorious campaign of, <ref target='Pg135'>135-7</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his triumph, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>attacked by the Saracens, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defeated, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>last years of, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heraclius Constantinus, son of Heraclius I., short reign of, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hierapolis taken by Nicephorus Phocas, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hieromax, battle of the, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hilderic, Vandal king, deposed, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hippodrome, the great, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='358'/><anchor id='Pg358'/>

<lg>
<l>Histiaeus holds Byzantium, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Honorius slays Stilicho, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hungary, converted to Christianity, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>invaded by Manuel I., <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>attacks the Ottoman Turks, <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Huniades, John, <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Huns, under Attila, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ravage Syria, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>threaten Constantinople, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defeated by Belisarius, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Iconium, Sultanate of, <hi rend='italic'>see under</hi> <ref target='index-seljouks'>Seljouks</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Iconoclasm, the movement, <ref target='Pg188'>188-9</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>vigorous under the Isaurian emperors, <ref target='Pg192'>192-7</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the ninth century, <ref target='Pg203'>203-10</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ended by Michael III., <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Iconodules, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Images, superstitions connected with, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>removed by Leo III., <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>use of, ceases in the East, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Innocent III., sends out Fourth Crusade, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wrath of with the Crusaders, <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Irene, the empress, regency of, <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>deposed, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>blinds her son and seizes the throne, <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-isaac-i'/>
<l>Isaac I. (Comnenus), his short reign, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-isaac-ii'/>
<l>Isaac II. (Angelus), rebels, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his reign, <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>deposed by his brother, <ref target='Pg278'>278</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>restored, <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dies, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Isaac Comnenus, of Cyprus, <ref target='Pg277'>277-8</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Isaurians, the, enlisted by Leo and Zeno, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dynasty of the, <ref target='Pg192'>192-9</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Isperich, king of Bulgaria, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Italy, conquered by Belisarius, <ref target='Pg088'>88-91</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>partly conquered by the Lombards, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Constans II. in, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>central parts of, lost, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>southern parts of, conquered by the Normans, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jacobites, in Egypt and Syria, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Janissaries, the, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jerusalem, Eudocia at, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taken by Persians, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Heraclius at, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taken by the Saracens, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taken by the Crusaders, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>John I. (Zimisces), murders his uncle, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>successful wars of, <ref target='Pg234'>234-7</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dies, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-john-ii'/>
<l>John II. (Comnenus), reign and conquests of, <ref target='Pg268'>268-9</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-john-iii'/>
<l>John III. (Ducas Vatatzes), <ref target='Pg300'>300</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conquers Thrace and Macedonia, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>John IV. (Ducas), dethroned by Michael Paleologus, <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-john-v'/>
<l>John V. (Paleologus), minority of, <ref target='Pg325'>325-8</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expels John Cantacuzenus, <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defeated by the Turks, <ref target='Pg330'>330</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>later years of, <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-john-vi'/>
<l>John VI. (Paleologus), reign of, <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>embraces Catholicism, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>John (Angelus), Emperor of Thessalonica, <ref target='Pg300'>300</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>John, King of Bulgaria, <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conquers Baldwin I., <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>John the Cappadocian, finance minister, <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-john-chrysostom'/>
<l>John Chrysostom, patriarch, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>exiled, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>John Ducas, regent, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>John the Faster, patriarch, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>John the Grammarian, patriarch, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref>, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>John Huniades, general, <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>John Lydus, author, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Julian, reign of, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Justin I., reign of, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Justin II., reign and wars of, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Justinian I., character of, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>marries Theodora, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>first Persian war of, <ref target='Pg071'>71-4</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Italian and African wars of, <ref target='Pg083'>83-93</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>recalls Belisarius, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his buildings, <ref target='Pg106'>106-9</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his legal work, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Justinian II., misfortunes of, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>banished, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reconquers his throne, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slain, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kadesia, battle of, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kaikhosru, Sultan, slain in battle, <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='359'/><anchor id='Pg359'/>

<lg>
<l>Karasi, Emirs of, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Karl the Great, crowned emperor, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kathisma, the, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Khaled, victories of, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Khazars, allied to Heraclius, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>shelter Justinian II., <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kief, Russian capital, <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kobad, wars of, with Justinian, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ladislas, king of Bulgaria, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ladislas, king of Poland and Hungary, <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Larissa, battle of, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lascaris, <hi rend='italic'>see under</hi> <ref target='index-theodore-i'>Theodore I.</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Latin language, used in the Balkan Peninsula, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>decay of the, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Law, Roman, codified by Justinian, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>changes of Leo III., <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Basil I., <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lazarus the painter, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lecky, Mr., views of, discussed, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lazica, wars of Justinian and Chosroës about, <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leo I., reign of, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leo III., the Isaurian, seizes the crown, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defends Constantinople, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>religious reforms of, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>political reforms of, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leo IV., short reign of, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leo V. (the Armenian) seizes the throne, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defeats the Bulgarians, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>murdered, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leo VI. (the Wise), reign of, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>literary works of, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leo the Deacon, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leontius, usurpation and fall of, <ref target='Pg175'>175-7</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slain, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Liberius conquers South Spain, <ref target='Pg096'>96-7</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Licinius, wars of with Maximinus Daza, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dethroned by Constantine I., <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Literature, <ref target='Pg221'>221-2</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lombards, the, leave Pannonia, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conquer North Italy, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defeated by Constans II., <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>subdue the Exarchate, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Louis IX., of France, gives money to Baldwin II., <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lupicinus, governor of Moesia, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lydus, John, author, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Macedonia, overrun by Slavs, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in hands of Boniface of Montferrat, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conquered by Stephen Dushan, <ref target='Pg327'>327</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maeander, battle of the, <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mahomet, the prophet, rise of, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mahomet I., Sultan, reunites the Ottoman Empire, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mahomet II. conquers Constantinople, <ref target='Pg343'>343-50</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maniakes, wars of, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-manuel-i'/>
<l>Manuel I. (Comnenus), reign and wars of, <ref target='Pg271'>271-2</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Manuel II. (Paleologus), reign and misfortunes of, <ref target='Pg336'>336-9</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Manzikert, battle of, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marcianus, reign of, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Martina, niece and wife of Heraclius, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>exiled, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Martyropolis, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maurice, reign of, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Persian wars, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fall and death of, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maximinus Daza takes Byzantium, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Melek-Adel, Sultan of Egypt, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mesembria, taken by Bulgarians, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>battle of, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mesopotamia, conquered by Heraclius, <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>invaded by John Zimisces, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Michael I. (Rhangabe), short reign of, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Michael II. (the Amorian), conspiracy of, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ecclesiastical policy of, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wars of, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Michael III. (the Drunkard), minority of, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>excesses and murder of, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Michael IV. (the Paphlagonian), reign and wars of, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Michael V., ephemeral power of, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='360'/><anchor id='Pg360'/>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-michael-vi'/>
<l>Michael VI. (Stratioticus), short reign of, <ref target='Pg248'>248-9</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-michael-vii'/>
<l>Michael VII. (Ducas), minority of, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>disastrous reign of, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Michael VIII. (Paleologus), usurpation of, <ref target='Pg303'>303-4</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>overthrows the Latin Empire, <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>disbands the Asiatic militia, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wars of, <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref>, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Michael IX., son and colleague of Andronicus II., defeated by the <q>Grand Company,</q> <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Michael Angelus, despot of Epirus, <ref target='Pg300'>300</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moawiah, Caliph, attacks Constantinople, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his armies defeated, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moesia, invaded by the Goths, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>seized by the Bulgarians, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Monks, characteristics of the early, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>favour image worship, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>persecuted by Constantine Copronymus, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Monophysites, <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moors, Gelimer flies to the, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Montferrat, <hi rend='italic'>see under</hi> <ref target='index-boniface'>Boniface</ref> and <ref target='index-conrad'>Conrad</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morals, effect of Christianity on, <ref target='Pg145'>145-7</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>general character of Byzantine, <ref target='Pg155'>155-6</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moslemah besieges Constantinople, <ref target='Pg185'>185-7</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Motassem, the Caliph, sacks Amorium, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Murad I., conquers Thrace, <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>suzerain of John V., <ref target='Pg330'>330</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conquers the Serbs, <ref target='Pg332'>332</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Murad II., besieges Constantinople, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>makes peace with Manuel II., <ref target='Pg337'>338</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wars of, <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Murtzuphlus, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='index-alexius-v'>Alexius V. (Ducas)</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Myriokephalon, battle of, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Naissus, birthplace of Constantine I., <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taken by the Bulgarians, <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Naples, taken by Belisarius, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>interference of the Pope with, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Narses, the eunuch, conquers Italy from the Goths, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Narses, General, burnt alive by Phocas, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Navy, the Byzantine, <ref target='Pg219'>219-20</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nicaea, taken by the Crusaders, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by the Ottomans, <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nicephorus I. dethrones Irene, <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>disastrous wars of, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nicephorus II., Phocas, takes Candia, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>emperor, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wars of, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>murdered by Zimisces, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nicholas V., pope, sends aid to Constantine XI., <ref target='Pg344'>344</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nicomedia, taken by the Ottomans, <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nineveh, battle of, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Normans, conquer Byzantine Italy, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>invade the empire, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>second invasion of repelled, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>third invasion of, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Notaras, John, <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nuceria, Goths beaten at, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Obeydah, Saracen general, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Obsequian theme, the, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Odoacer, conquered by Theodoric, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Omar, the Caliph, visits Jerusalem, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Omeyades, dynasty of the, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Orkhan, Emir of the Ottomans, reign and successes of, <ref target='Pg323'>323-4</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Pretender to the Sultanate, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Orosius, history of, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ostrogoths, under Theodoric in Moesia, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conquer Italy, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>weakness of the kingdom of, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>attacked by Justinian, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wars of with Belisarius and Narses, <ref target='Pg089'>89-94</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>crushed, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Othman, Emir of the Turks, conquests of, <ref target='Pg321'>321-23</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Palace, imperial, at Constantinople, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='361'/><anchor id='Pg361'/>

<lg>
<l>Paleologus, house of, <hi rend='italic'>see under</hi> <ref target='index-michael-vi'>Michael VI.</ref>, Andronicus <ref target='index-andronicus-ii'>II.</ref> and <ref target='index-andronicus-iii'>III.</ref>, John <ref target='index-john-v'>V.</ref> and <ref target='index-john-vi'>VI.</ref>, <ref target='index-constantine-xi'>Constantine XI.</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Palermo, taken by Belisarius, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Palestine, conquered by the Persians, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>overrun by the Arabs, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>subdued by the Crusaders, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pandects, compiled by Justinian, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Patriarchal palace of Constantinople, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Patriarchs, <hi rend='italic'>see under</hi> <ref target='index-john-chrysostom'>John</ref>, <ref target='index-sergius'>Sergius</ref>, &amp;c.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paulicians, sect of the persecuted by Basil I, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paulinus, put to death by Theodosius II., <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Patzinak Tartars, the, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wars of with Alexius I., <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pavia, taken by the Lombards, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Persian Empire destroyed by the Arabs, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Persian Wars under Julian, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>under Justinian, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>under Maurice, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>under Phocas and Heraclius, <ref target='Pg130'>130-36</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peter, general under Nicephorus Phocas, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philip of Macedon, attacks Byzantium, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philip of Swabia, helps Alexius Angelus the younger, <ref target='Pg279'>279-8</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philippicus, usurpation and fall of, <ref target='Pg180'>180-1</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phocas, emperor, his usurpation, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cruelty of, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slain, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phocas, Bardas, rebels against John Zimisces, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>against Basil II., <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phocas, Nicephorus, reign of, <ref target='Pg228'>228-30</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wars of, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>murdered, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Photius, patriarch, his learning, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plague, the great of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 542, <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Popes, rise of the power of, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>estranged from the empire, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>call in the Franks, <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Priscus, general of Maurice, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-prusa'/>
<l>Prusa, taken by the Turks, <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacked by the Mongols, <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pulcheria, Empress, with her brother Theodosius II., <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>marries Marcianus, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pelekanon, battle of, <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Polyeuktus, patriarch, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ravenna, taken by Belisarius, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>exarchate of, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>occupied by the Lombards, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rhangabe, Michael, short reign of, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rhazates, general, slain by Heraclius, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Richard Coeur de Leon, conquers Cyprus, <ref target='Pg278'>278</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Robert Guiscard, wars of with Alexius I., <ref target='Pg259'>259-60</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>final repulse of, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roger de Flor, hired by Andronicus II., <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conquests of, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>assassinated, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Romanus I. (Lecapenus), long regency of, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Romanus II, short reign of, <ref target='Pg228'>228-9</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Romanus III. (Argyrus), married to Zoe, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dies, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Romanus IV. (Diogenes), reign of, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defeated by Turks, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dies, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rome, taken by Belisarius, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>besieged by the Goths, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taken by Baduila, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Gregory the Great at, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Constans II. at, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Charles the Great at, <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ruric, founds the Russian kingdom, <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Russians, early invasions of, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>attack Bulgaria, <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defeated by John Zimisces, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>converted to Christianity, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sabatius, father of Justinian, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Samuel, king of Bulgaria, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wars and death of, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saoudji, rebels against Murad I., <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='362'/><anchor id='Pg362'/>

<lg>
<l>Sapor, king of Persia, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-saracens'/>
<l>Saracens, the, converted by Mahomet, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>invade Syria, <ref target='Pg160'>160-2</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conquer Egypt, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conquer Persia, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>civil wars of the, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for later history, <hi rend='italic'>see under</hi> names of the Caliphs</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sardis, taken by Alexius I., <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scholarian Guards, the, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-seljouks'/>
<l>Seljouk Turks, conquer Persia and Armenia, <ref target='Pg250'>250-1</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>invade the empire, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conquer Asia Minor, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defeated by the Crusaders, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wars of with the Comneni, <ref target='Pg265'>265-7-72</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>with Theodore I., <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-sergius'/>
<l>Sergius, patriarch, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Senate House at Constantinople, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Servians, cross the Danube, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conquered by Basil II., <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rebel against Michael IV., <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conquered by Manuel I., <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>overrun Macedonia, <ref target='Pg327'>327</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>subdued by the Turks, <ref target='Pg330'>330</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Severus, emperor, takes Byzantium, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shahrbarz, the Persian, takes Jerusalem, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defeated by Heraclius, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sicily, conquered by Belisarius, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>invaded by Saracens, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>finally conquered by Saracens, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>invaded by Maniakes, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref> ;</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Siroes, deposes his father Chosroës, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Skleros, Bardas, rebel against Basil II., <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Slavery, influence of Christianity on, <ref target='Pg147'>147-8</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Slavs, invade the Balkan Peninsula, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>subject to the Avars, <ref target='Pg124'>124-37</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ravages of the, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>made tributary by Constans II., <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>besiege Thessalonica, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sophia. St., first building of, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burnt in 410 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burnt in the <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Nika</foreign> riots, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rebuilding of by Justinian, <ref target='Pg107'>107-9</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>desecrated by the Turks, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spain, South of, conquered by Justinian's generals, <ref target='Pg096'>96-7</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stauracius, emperor, short reign of, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Statues at Constantinople, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>destruction of by the Crusaders, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Suleiman, Saracen vizier, besieges Constantinople, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dies, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Turkish Sultan, reign of, <ref target='Pg334'>334-6</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stephen Lecapenus, usurpation of, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stephen Dushan, king of Servia, conquests of, <ref target='Pg327'>327</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stephen, pope, calls in the Franks, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stilicho, wars of with Alaric, <ref target='Pg047'>47-8</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>murdered by Honorius, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Swiatoslaf, king of Russia, conquers Bulgaria, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defeated by Zimisces, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Syria, invaded by the Huns, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>invaded by Kobad, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conquered by Shahrbarz, <ref target='Pg129'>129-30</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>invaded and conquered by the Saracens, <ref target='Pg162'>162-3</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conquests of Nicephorus Phocas in, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>subdued by the Crusaders, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sophronius, patriarch of Jerusalem, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tagina, battle of, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tarsus, taken by Nicephorus Phocas, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Teia, Gothic king, slain in battle, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Telemachus, martyrdom of, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Terbel, king of Bulgaria, aids Justinian II., <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Themes, institution of the provincial system of, <ref target='Pg167'>167-8</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theodahat, Gothic king, murders his wife, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>war of with Justinian, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slain, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theodora, wife of Justinian, career of, <ref target='Pg066'>66-8</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the <hi rend='italic'>Nika</hi> riots, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death of, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theodora, wife of Theophilus, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>regency of, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theodora, daughter of Constantine VIII., reign of, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='363'/><anchor id='Pg363'/>

<lg>
<l>Theodora, daughter of Cantacuzenus, married to Orkhan, <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-theodore-i'/>
<l>Theodore I. (Lascaris), at the siege of Constantinople, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>made emperor at Nicaea, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wars of, <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-theodore-ii'/>
<l>Theodore II. (Ducas), short reign of, <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theodore, Studita, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theodoric, son of Triarius, wars of with Zeno, <ref target='Pg062'>62-3</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theodoric, son of Theodemir, rebels against Zeno, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conquers Italy, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dies, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theodotus, minister of Justinian II., <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theodosius I., wars of, with the Goths, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dies, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theodosius II., reign of, <ref target='Pg054'>54-6</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>war with Attila, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theodosius III., usurpation of, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>abdicates, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theophano, empress, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>murders her husband, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theophilus, emperor, reign and wars of, <ref target='Pg208'>208-11</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his love of art, <ref target='Pg224'>224-5</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theophilus, patriarch of Alexandria, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thessalonica, besieged by the Slavs, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>stormed by the Saracens, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Crusading kingdom of, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>retaken by the Greeks, <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taken by the Turks, <ref target='Pg330'>330</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>recovered, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>finally lost, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theuderic, Frankish king, attacks Witiges, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thomas, rebel in Asia, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tiberius II., Constantinus, short reign of, <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wars of, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tiberius III., Apsimarus, rebellion of, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>deposed and slain, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tiberius, son of Justinian II., slain, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Togrul Beg, Turkish chief, conquers Bagdad, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Totila, <hi rend='italic'>see under</hi> Baduila</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trebizond, empire of, founded, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tribonian, minister of Justinian I., <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tricameron, battle of, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Turks, <hi rend='italic'>see under</hi> Seljouks, and names of Ottoman Sultans</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tuscany, conquered by the Lombards, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tyana, sacked by Saracens, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Uldes, king of the Huns, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Urosh, king of Servia, <ref target='Pg327'>327</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Uscup, capital of Stephen Dushan, <ref target='Pg327'>327</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Valens, reign of, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slain in battle by the Goths, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vandals, kingdom of the, in Africa, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conquered by Belisarius, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Varangian guards, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Durazzo, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at siege of Constantinople, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref>, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Verona, Baduila at, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Venice, rise of, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>commercial treaties of, with Alexius I., <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wars with Manuel I., <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>aids the Fourth Crusade, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>engages in war with Alexius III., <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>share of in plunder of Constantinople, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at war with Michael VIII., <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vigilius, pope, persecuted by Justinian, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vikings, the, in Russia, <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Visigoths, the, invade Moesia, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slay Valens, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>under Alaric, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>migrate to Italy, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vitalian, rebellion of, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Welid, caliph, wars of, with the empire, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Witiges, Gothic king, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>besieges Rome, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>submits to Belisarius, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yezid, Saracen prince, wars of with the empire, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='364'/><anchor id='Pg364'/>

<lg>
<l>Zachariah, patriarch of Jerusalem, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zapetra, taken by Theophilus, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zara, taken by the Crusaders, <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zeno, emperor, reorganizes the army, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wars of with the Goths, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sends Theodoric to Italy, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zeuxippus, baths of, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zimisces, John, murders Nicephoras 1, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Russian war of, <ref target='Pg235'>235-7</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Asiatic conquests of, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zoe, empress, her marriages and reign, <ref target='Pg245'>245-7</ref></l>
</lg>

</div>

</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
